The 2015 election and my entry to Parliament on the National List

Ian Goonetilleke who was the chief Librarian at Peradeniya is a legend. His erudition, commitment and ready assistance to fledgling scholars has been recognised by many. I was lucky to be included among his friends during my student days in Peradeniya and after. Ian and his wife Roslin often invited hungry undergraduates like me for a meal. The food was good. But the conversation that preceded it was even better. His anecdotes about his best friend George Keyt were hilarious.

We would often see George being driven through Campus in Ian’s Volkswagen, to his house in Mahakanda for a meal and the former’s scandalous conversations about local artists, politicians, film stars, businessmen, villagers and his rapacious neighbours in Sirimalwatte. In 1958, HL Seneviratne and I as undergraduates helped Ian and Ralph Peiris to mount an exhibition of George’s latest paintings in the Senate room at Peradeniya.

We visited the artist’s atelier in Sirimalwatte to choose the paintings which had to be mounted for the exhibition. For the cover of the souvenir George selected the line drawing of Vessantara and his queen which the famous Steuben Glass company of USA had embossed on their expensive products.

Ian had collected a large number of paintings, line drawings, sketches, postcards and letters from George Keyt which he had lovingly framed and hung in his dining room. After retirement and a series of letters criticizing the then Minister of Higher Education for emasculating the independence of Universities, he built a small house in Navinna which did not have space-for his full collection of paintings and books.

He donated his collection of paintings to Peradeniya University after the death of Roslin. Ian died sometime later and the University authorities became the legatees of this priceless collection. However the university bureaucracy was not particularly interested in conserving it. The collection was stored in the basement of the library. When Monty Gopallawa, who was an alumnus of Peradeniya, was made Governor of Central Province he decided to intervene in this matter and sought my assistance, which I was more than ready to provide.

The Vice Chancellor had allocated a block of empty land near Jayatilleke Hall for a museum to house the Ian-Keyt collection and other memorabilia like costumes from Sarachchandra’s plays designed by Siri Gunasinghe. I managed to persuade my good friend Architect Ashley De Vos to design a building comprising different modules which would house paintings from each phase of the artists evolution.

For instance the India module would house the paintings done in Bombay and Calcutta during George’s three year sojourn in India. I was confident that I could get that module built by the Indian High Commission and well wishers from India. Unfortunately the University administration did not take up these offers to support their building programme. Later as Minister of Special Projects I managed to allocate ten million rupees for this project through a Cabinet decision.

A meeting was held in Vice Chancellor’s lodge with VC Dissanayake and Ranjini Obeyesekere but to date the University authorities have not embarked on this project. All the while the paintings languish in the library basement.

One of the pleasures I derived from being MP for Kandy district was that I could interact with academic communities at Peradeniya and Polgolla. Polgolla was the venue of the Mahaweli Teacher Training institute as well as training institutes of the Cooperative and Rural Development Departments. This was in addition to a large number of private teaching institutions located there. In fact Polgolla (or nearby Aruppola) was earlier considered as a possible site for our first residential university.

The proponent of Polgolla was A. Ratnayake who was the dominant politician in the Kandy district during the DS Senanayake era. Polgolla was passed over for Peradeniya because more land was available there from a large tea estate which belonged to a British planter. Says the official history of Peradeniya Campus: “The goverment acquired this site in 1938. The extent of land was about 700 hectares and a further 120 hectares were added later. About 150 hectares of the land were developed and landscaped to create the University park on which the University complex is now located while the rest of the land remains forested”.

Kshenuka Senewiratne, then ambassador in Thailand, is also in the picture

Using my prerogative as Minister to appoint members to the University Council I sought the services of several colleagues from my Peradeniya days who had distinguished themselves as academics, administrators and prominent citizens of Kandy. Among my nominees were JB Disanayake, Wijaya Wickremaratne, Lal Wijenayake [both well regarded Kandy lawyers] Dhammika Amerasinghe (a former Additional Secretary to President CBK) and Gamini Disanayake [a Kandy architect].

They all grumbled that it was a time consuming assignment but finally accepted my offer because of their sentimental links to Peradeniya University which was our “alma mater”. Before them many of the appointees were political supporters of the former Minister who did not have a commitment to academic life. They were important vote gatherers for my predecessor but I removed them irrespective of the political cost to me. One such “Councillor” who was a chairman of a local Pradeshiya Sabha, became my sworn enemy over his dismissal. He went out of his way to reduce my votes in his bailiwick.

However much I tried to help, the atmosphere on campus was detrimental to our progress. The students were browbeaten by Peratugami and JVP cadres into joining the “Antare” or the Inter University Student Federation. The “rag” which has now been degraded to include physical punishment for recalcitrant new entrants, was used to browbeat and “psyche” students into submission.

In our day a very attractive feature of campus life were the regular talks delivered to student assemblies by distinguished outsiders, including top leaders of all political parties. These speakers enjoyed the parry and thrust of debate and often enlivened the proceedings by arguing with the students. Among them were speakers of the calibre of Bandaranaikes [SWRD and Felix] Colvin, Dudley, Philip, NM, Pieter Keuneman and Tissa Wijeratna. Some of our best memories of campus life were of these speeches and verbal exchanges.

There was one dimunitive LSSPer from Ramanathan Hall named Charitha Wijeratna who took great delight in crossing swords with all non-LSSP speakers. He was not very coherent though persistent and his interventions inevitably drew good natured groans from the packed audience in the Arts Theatre.

Due to a Cabinet reshuffle I did not get the opportunity to spend much time in the Higher Education Ministry. However together with the Higher Education Commission I had begun to rethink of the resource allocations of the Ministry which is today heavily lopsided. Of the approximately 10,000 secondary schools in the island only 1,000 have facilities for science education. This means that a large part of our school going population has no access to STEM (Science, technology, engineering and mathematics) education and are therefore trapped in a vicious cycle of liberal arts education and consequent unemployment.

Large numbers of students compete for entry to the Arts and Social Science faculties of Universities which are thereby forced to allocate the bigger part of their resources to this sector. Having consumed these large allocations state universities produce arts graduates whose main ambition is to become teachers thus completing the vicious circle. More arts stream students in schools put pressure to increase the arts intake to Universities which in turn produces more arts graduates who demand the creation of more teaching posts–a cycle that no politician has attempted to breach because of a fear of losing popularity.

As a consequence the more urbanized and more affluent children who can enter the 1,000 science schools have a head start when it comes to education which is compatible with the job market. Indeed graduates of Moratuwa University and the IT, engineering and medical faculties of other Universities have no difficulty in finding jobs both here and abroad. Add to this the output of private technical educational institutions like SLUT and NIBM and we find a difference of prospects of young people depending on their academic choice, which itself is largely determined by socio-economic circumstances.

The rich and burgeoning middle classes, whose children have adopted to new technologies, have never had it so good. The chasm between the rural arts student and the urban beneficiaries of STEM education is growing. As we have discussed earlier, Daniel Lerner’s admonitions in his book “The Passing of Traditional Society” regarding “Iranian youth educated in the arts who hide their frustration in Farsi poetry and short film making due to a skewered modernization” which led to street violence of the Shah’s time, are fast coming true also for our country.

The slogans of the “Antare” [in emotional but well composed Sinhala] and their proclivity to march to the orders of their Marxist handlers, are a sure indication that the contradictions in our educational system are now coming to boiling point. Though the “Aragalaya” cannot be compared to the Iranian revolution or the “Arab Spring” in their intensity, several common factors are beginning to emerge.

Following the premature end of the tenure of 14th Parliament, elections for the successor Parliament were held in August 2015. The pattern regarding our Parliamentary elections is clear. The recently concluded Presidential election determines the result of the Parliamentary election which follows soon after. This was true also of the 2015 election where the UNP led coalition won 106 seats while the UPFA led by Mahinda Rajapaksa secured 95 seats. The UNP was seven seats short of a majority in the House but since the SLFP led by President Sirisena had a number of members who were willing to collaborate with the new government it was assured of a working majority with Ranil Wickremesinghe as Prime Minister.

The final results of the 2015 Parliamentary election was as follows: Ranil-led United National Front for Good Governance 5,098,916 [45. 6 Percent] 106 seats, MR-led United Peoples Freedom Alliance 4,732,664 [42. 3 Percent] 95 seats and JVP JVP 543,844 [six Percent] six seats.

An analysis of the election results showed a clear divide which has became a pattern of Sri Lankan politics and elections. While electorates in the North and East went overwhelmingly to the UNP, the Sinhala Buddhist heartland remained with Mahinda Rajapaksa with the exception of Polonnaruwa, which was the fiefdom of President Sirisena. Districts with a mixed ethnic population fell into the UNP camp thereby ensuring a UNP majority.

The following details confirms that analysis; (a) Sinhala dominated “heartland” districts won by UPFA; Galle, Matara, Hambantota, Anuradhapura, Kurunegala, Ratnapura, Kalutara [radical] Moneragala and (b) Districts with significant racial minorities won by UNP; Colombo, Gampaha, Kandy, Nuwara Eliya, Matale, Kegalle, Puttalam, Amparai, Badulla and Polonnaruwa [Sirisena factor].

As regards Kandy when there is a close contest, the district goes to the UNP since the minorities become the decisive factor. In fact in the list of MPs returned from the UNP on this occasion, Muslims constituted the bigger number. My nephew Dilum was returned as a UPFA member comfortably while I entered Parliament as a national list MP. However politically we went in different directions because while I remained with the Sirisena faction of the SLFP, Dilum became an important MP favouring MR and his supporters.

He became the youth leader of the “Pohottuwa” when it was formed later. The UPFA group that had supported Sirisena and accepted Cabinet office faced a dilemma at this election since the mass of UPFA supporters were unwilling to vote for them. To make matters worse MR loyalists went about campaigning against them in their electorates. I was glad that I had opted to become a national list MP, an offer which was made to me by Lalith Athulathmudali decades ago.

Other Sirisena supporters like SB Dissanayake, Fowzie and Mahinda Samarasinghe who had lost their seats agitated to get slots in the national list. At this stage Sirisena decided to give all the national list positions to his supporters leaving MR loyalists like GL Peiris who deserved selection out in limbo. As a nominated MP at first I was asked to lead the SLFP team in Parliament because other seniors had accepted Cabinet office. My SLFP team sat in the Opposition benches with MR.

I represented the UPFA in the management committee of Parliament of which the Chairman was Karu Jayasuriya who had been elected Speaker of the House. He attended to his duties with great diligence and bravery. He was easily one of the best Speakers of our Parliament. The other UPFA faction leaders like Wimal Weerawansa were apprehensive that I would penalize them in allocating speaking slots in Parliament. This I did not do and soon they would come to me with their problems which I took up in the management committee. Since most decisions regarding Parliament procedures are made by the management committee I retained a lot of power which I was determined to exercise in a fair manner.

But after a few weeks in this position President Sirisena had a discussion with me in his office, and asked me to itemize the subjects I would like to have as a Minister in his Cabinet. His Secretary Abeykoon and Deputy Secretary WAS Karunaratna were tasked to prepare a draft gazette notification for this purpose. He told me that he had limited the number of Cabinet ministers and that I would be filling the only available vacancy.

He wanted it filled by me as he was under pressure from various influential persons to fill it with their favourites. We two had a good relationship and he often asked me to represent him at meetings where he had to make an appearance. I always made sure that I did not overstep the line at these meetings and began by emphatically stating that I was only representing the leader at his request. Sometimes it led to a little tension because the sponsors of the meeting wanted the prestigious President himself to arrive and not an understudy like me. On one such occasion an apologetic President appeared in the hall while I was on my feet because the sponsor had rushed to his residence and forced him to come in order to salvage his reputation as a close friend of the leader. But such embarrassments were few and far between.

(Excerpted from Vol. 3 of the Sarath Amunugama autobiography) ✍️

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.