CASIO intensifies fight against counterfeits in Sri Lanka

In a strong commitment to upholding brand integrity and protecting consumers, Casio Computer Co. Ltd., headquartered in Japan, after its successful enforcement against counterfeit watches, recently conducted another significant enforcement action against counterfeit calculators including both desktop and scientific ranges, in Sri Lanka.

This initiative is part of the Casio Group’s IP Enforcement Policy, aimed at combating the rising issue of counterfeit Casio products in the Sri Lankan market and safeguarding its valued consumers.

In collaboration with a local law firm and the Colombo Crime Division (CCD), Casio successfully carried out a raid on a leading wholesaler and importer of stationery goods based in Colombo. As a result of this coordinated operation, authorities seized substantial quantities of counterfeit calculators which were imitations of running Casio Calculator models.

This significant seizure reflects Casio’s robust commitment to combating the pervasive issue of counterfeit goods, which not only threatens the company’s reputation but also poses a serious risk to students’ futures due to the potential for erroneous outputs from such calculators, while adversely impacting trade and commerce. Such confusion undermines the trust that Casio has built over the years and highlights the need for vigilance. As we move forward, Casio remains resolute in its mission to protect consumers and uphold the integrity of its brand, ensuring that quality and authenticity prevail in the marketplace.

Casio India Legal Head Gurmeet Singh said: “As a global leader, Casio is deeply committed to upholding the integrity of our brand and ensuring that the future of students relying on such calculators is not compromised. We believe this step would go a long way in improving the educational standards for students in Sri Lanka and facilitates easy access to genuine Casio calculators across the geography. This operation reaffirms our unwavering dedication to safeguarding our brand and assuring that our consumers can trust the quality and authenticity of every Casio product they purchase. In collaboration with local authorities, we will continue to champion authenticity and protect the interests of our consumers.”

As Casio intensifies its efforts against the influx of counterfeit goods, the Company strongly encourages consumers to buy from authorised retailers to ensure they receive genuine products that meet its high standards. By partnering with local authorities, Casio is dedicated to protecting its brand reputation and ensuring a safe shopping experience for all customers.