Millers’ Rolls-Royces and farmers’ tears

Paddy farmers have refused to sell their produce to the Paddy Marketing Board (PMD) at the prices offered by the government. They are demanding better prices in view of increasing production costs, and their protests are gathering momentum. Their consternation is understandable. They backed the JVP-led NPP to the hilt, enabling it to win elections, expecting it to liberate them from the clutches of unscrupulous millers. Today, big-time rice millers are buying Rolls-Royces and helicopters while farmers are mortgaging their houses and tractors, unable to recover production costs.

Protesting farmers have claimed that although the government has offered to buy paddy, most of its warehouses still have stocks of paddy purchased during the Maha season. Even if storage facilities are available, the government can buy only 2% of the national paddy production, according to the PMD officials. So, how can the government make an effective market intervention to safeguard the interests of paddy farmers and consumers? It apparently does not explore other ways and means of preventing wealthy millers from exploiting paddy farmers and consumers.

Powerful rice millers, who bankroll election campaigns of main political parties, leverage their political connections to protect their interests. Reams have been written about how they manipulate governments to facilitate exploitation. They create rice shortages a few weeks before the commencement of every paddy harvesting period, prompting governments to import rice. Thereafter, they release some of their stocks into the market, bringing the prices of rice down so that they can buy paddy from farmers at very low prices. When their rice enters the market, imported rice in government warehouses rot and end up in breweries or animal feed factories. Governments, capitalist or socialist, are wary of antagonising the powerful millers for obvious reasons.

Curiously, President Anura Kumara Dissanayake has recently argued that Sri Lanka should diversify the uses of locally produced rice by manufacturing more value-added products. He has said rice can be used for producing beer and animal feed among other things. The government has cancelled a gazette notification that prohibited the use of rice as a raw material for beer and animal feed. Rice-based food products are common in this country, and the use of rice for manufacturing them does not adversely affect the public. However, the lifting of the aforesaid ban could lead to unforeseen problems.

The question is whether it is advisable to allow a water-intensive crop, raised with subsidised fertiliser, etc., to be used for manufacturing beer or animal feed when alternative raw materials are available. Is the government capable of regulating the paddy and rice markets to prevent a situation where the manufacturers of beer and animal feed will act in a way that may lead to a shortage of rice?

It is hoped that the government will be able to build sufficient buffer stocks of paddy, particularly in view of the current El Niño phenomenon, which is expected to adversely impact rainfall here. El Niño drastically changes predictable weather patterns and poses challenges for agriculture and water resources, experts have warned.

If the government is planning to divert a part of the local rice production to breweries and animal feed factories due to storage issues, as claimed in some quarters, it should seriously consider abandoning its plan and expanding its warehouse network by rebuilding the PMD storehouses, most of which went to wrack and ruin under UNP governments, following the 1977 regime change or were destroyed by the JVP during its second uprising in the late 1980s.

Minister Bimal Rathnayake has gone on record as saying that unlike in the past, today there are ‘tons and tons of money’ in the state coffers. If so, there is no reason why the government should not utilise a fraction of those funds to help the hapless farmers struggling to keep their heads above water and develop the PMD so that it will be able to regulate the paddy and rice markets and safeguard the interests of rice growers and consumers.

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.