Ambassador Chandana Weerasena presents credentials to European Council President

Ambassador of Sri Lanka in Belgium Chandana Weerasena presented his Letters of Credence to European Council President Charles Michel as the Ambassador of Sri Lanka to the European Union at the Europa Building of the European Council in Brussels on 22 May.

The presentation of credentials was followed by a meeting with the President of the European Council. President Michel recalled EU’s important relations with Sri Lanka and inquired on the recent challenging economic situation of the country.

In response, Ambassador Weerasena conveyed the greetings of the President of Sri Lanka to the President of the European Council and briefly outlined Sri Lanka’s economic recovery from the unprecedented challenges, comparatively within a short period of time. The Ambassador also took the opportunity to express appreciation to EU institutions, members of the Paris Club and all bilateral partners in the EU region for their unwavering support at the most difficult period, in particular receiving IMF facility as well as concluding debt restructuring process. The Ambassador further said that, Sri Lanka always values the engagement with all EU institutions.

President Michel, while appreciating Sri Lanka’s active engagement with the EU, stated that EU’s aim is to adopt more progressive legislations for the betterment of the world. He reiterated EU’s readiness to help Sri Lanka as well as requested to work closely with his office for such facilitation.

Ambassador Weerasena is also designated as Ambassador of Sri Lanka to the Grand Duchy of Luxembourg. He is a career diplomat who had joined the Sri Lanka Foreign Service in 2003.

He has also previously served at Sri Lanka Missions in Japan, Australia and India in addition to a number of other assignments at the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Sri Lanka. Ambassador Weerasena completed his postgraduate studies at the Australian National University with ‘Master of Diplomacy’ and ‘Master of Asia Pacific Studies’. He graduated from the University of Sri Jayewardenepura, with a ‘Bachelor of Commerce’ degree and was a past student of Ampitiya Berrewaerts College, Kandy.