India’s Modi tells Sri Lanka President he looks to economic partnership, amid poll setback

ECONOMYNEXT – India’s Prime Minister Narenda Modi has exchanged tweets with Sri Lanka’s political leadership after mammoth elections that saw his Bharathiya Janatha Party losing its earlier absolute majority.

The BJP is expected to win only 240 seats, short of a required 272 majority in the 543 assembly, and will have to govern with his broader NDA coalition which is expected to get 295.

The opposition India block, led by Rahul Ghadhi has 232 seats with the Congress itself getting 99 seats almost doubling its tally.

Modi has lost ground amid inflation, and his authoritarian nationalist policies which also saw the election commissions independence undermined with the removal of the Chief Justice and pending removal of personal laws, the opposition has said.

“I look forward to our continued cooperation on the India-Sri Lanka Economic Partnership,” Modi replied to President Ranil Wickremesinghe’s congratulatory x.com message.

Thank you @RW_UNP. I look forward to our continued cooperation on the India-Sri Lanka Economic Partnership. https://t.co/seOUZfLAd7

“Our relations with Sri Lanka are special and uniquely fraternal,” Modi told opposition leader Sajith Premadasa.

“We are committed to further strengthen our unbreakable bonds in keeping with our neighbourhood first policy”.

Thank you @sajithpremadasa for your warm wishes! Our relations with Sri Lanka are special and uniquely fraternal. We are committed to further strengthen our unbreakable bonds in keeping with our neighbourhood first policy! https://t.co/6mf5x0FsuZ

“As the India-Sri Lanka partnership charts new frontiers, look forward to your continued support,” Modi told ex-President Mahinda Rajapaksa.

Thank you for your wishes, my friend @PresRajapaksa. As the India-Sri Lanka partnership charts new frontiers, look forward to your continued support. https://t.co/UvGo5ps6vU

Without an absolute majority Modi has to negotiate with his coalition  partners to form the next government.

Before the election, his coalition has said they are expecting to 400 seats.

“It is the first time since 1962 that a government has been elected three times in a row,” Modi said as the results became clear.

“Our Constitution is our guiding light. I want to assure that the NDA government will work with all states.”

Exit polls over the weekened, had predicted a big win for Modi though some political analysts had earlier said that heightened anti-Muslim rhetoric pointed to early indications that the BJP knew the result was going to be close.

The BJP also lost the Faizabad seat where the contentions Ram Temple of Ayodhya was built.