Lassana Flora unveils floral outlet at BIA

Lassana Flora, Sri Lanka’s premier florist and greenhouse agri-producer, launched the first floral outlet at the Bandaranaike International Airport (BIA); strategically located within the arrival terminal. The outlet offers a thoughtful and convenient way for visitors to greet incoming travelers with a fresh, vibrant bouquet, adding a profound touch of warmth and appreciation.

It presents an exquisite selection of fresh flowers and expertly crafted bouquets, thoughtfully priced to be accessible to all. For those desiring a personalized touch, customized bouquets can be conveniently pre-ordered online via the company website – lassasna.com – and the dedicated hotline to ensure a truly unique welcome. A diverse range of standard floral arrangements are also available for both pre-booking and immediate purchase around-the-clock directly at the BIA outlet.

The boutique at the BIA was ceremonially launched before distinguished guests that included Chief Guest, Chairman of the Airport and Aviation Services of Sri Lanka, Air Chief Marshall, Harsha Abeywickrema, and Guest of Honour, Miss World Sri Lanka 2024, Ms. Anudi Gunasekera.

“We are incredibly proud to open BIA’s first-ever floral outlet right here at the arrival terminal,” stated Dr. Lasantha Malavige, Chairman/Managing Director of Lassana Flora. “We understand that an airport is a place of profound emotional connection, where families and friends joyfully reunite. Our mission is to enhance these cherished moments by offering the simple yet heartfelt joy of gifting a beautiful bouquet, allowing loved ones to express their affection and welcome travelers home in the most heartwarming way.”

Forte Diagnostics and Health Vectors Partner to Launch Sri Lanka’s First AI-Powered Medical Diagnostics

Hrithik Roshan to ignite entertainment journey of City of Dreams Sri Lanka on August 2

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.