SL targeting more than I million Chinese tourists; 3000 Chinese athletes to participate in May marathon

Sri Lanka will go all out to get more than 1 million Chinese tourists to visit the island nation within the next few years, Sri Lanka Institute of Tourism and Hotel Management (SLITHM) chairman Shirantha Peiris said.

Peiris, who is involved in launching the tourism arm of what is referred to as the China Project, told The Island Financial Review that attracting Chinese visitors here is one of the prime objectives of the Project.

A study tour of China was organized by the Prime Minister’s office and the delegation was led by State Minister of Social Empowerment Anupa Pasqual.

Peiris added: ‘During the study tour I was able to connect, Agro Tourism / Home stays and discuss collaborations with hospitality & tourism institutes. I also had discussions with VP Chongqing Vocational Institute of Tourism on exchange programs.

‘I was involved in launching Sri Lanka’s Ni Hao Zhong Guo (China Project) Smart Tourism (System) Industry Education project.

‘As a result of these projects, we have already initiated a dialogue for a marathon to take place in Sri Lanka during the first week of May 2024, with 2000 – 3000 athletes participating from China. We will also have support staff and families accompanying the athletes. Sri Lankan athletes too will be invited to take part.

‘The first batch of Chinese tourists is due to arrive this month for leisure travel, while the second batch of some 5,000 is scheduled to visit in May to participate in the first Chinese marathon here.

‘With regard to the SLITHM degree program, we have successfully held the Institutional Review last year and gone through the Subject Review in January 2024. SLITHM is hoping to introduce the degree program for locals and international students in 2025, subject to all approvals, including Cabinet approval being granted.’

Speaking at a press briefing in Colombo on Wednesday, Sri Lanka Tourism Development Authority (SLTDA) Director General Nalin Perera said the tourism sector is anticipating Rs. 7 billion in revenue this year.

‘Out of this, Rs. 5.18 billion will be from embarkation fees and a further Rs. 2,087 billion will be utilized from the Tourism Development Levy, he said.

Perera added: ‘Out of this amount, 70 per cent will go to the Sri Lanka Tourism Promotions Bureau (SLTPB) 14 per cent to the SLTDA, 12 per cent to the SLITHM and the rest to the Sri Lanka Conventions Bureau.

‘SLTPB is gearing up to introduce a fresh tourism brand — the Buddhist Trail, to tap into the rich cultural and religious heritage of the country. Marine tourism is another area into which we are planning go all out within the first quarter of this year.

‘The former initiative aims to highlight Sri Lanka’s deep-rooted Buddhist heritage and promote the island as a prominent pilgrimage destination on a global scale.’

SLTPB chairman Chalaka Gajabahu said: ‘Sri Lanka, as a Buddhist country, holds immense potential to establish a unique tourism brand that resonates globally.

‘At the developmental stage, the Buddhist Trail project aims to emulate the success of similar initiatives like India’s Buddhist Tourism Circuit and the Ramayana Trail. The Ravana concept too will be promoted.

“With the rich heritage, breath-taking landscapes and profound spiritual significance, Sri Lanka can emerge as a leading destination for Buddhist pilgrimages and cultural exploration on the global tourism map.

‘We will make Sri Lanka a more happening destination; 2024 is going to be a very positive year.’

‘The fresh initiatives by the tourism authorities aim to significantly boost tourism activities, with the goal of increasing the average daily spend of tourists to USD 500 from the current USD 160, putting Sri Lanka in league with luxury destinations like the Maldives.

‘As per the provisional data by the Central Bank, the earnings per tourists witnessed a rebound in January 2024. The earnings per tourist arrival have improved to USD 1,641 in January, from USD 1,580 in the 1H23 period. In the 2H23 period, the earnings dropped significantly.

‘This is a step-by-step process. It won’t happen overnight. The event calendar will feature a diverse range of activities, including a water festival, Ride for Ceylon and a ‘unique’ event in Sigiriya.

‘I can’t divulge more details of the Sigiriya event but I can say it will be a surprise.

‘Additionally, a key meetings, incentives, conferences and exhibitions (MICE) event is scheduled to be held in the south of Sri Lanka next year.’

British Council launches Youth-Led Green and Inclusive Initiatives in Businesses project in Sri Lanka

Declaration of attractive dividends by banking sector counters rejuvenates bourse

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.