Noeline…in the spotlight

A name that will never ever be forgotten, especially in the local Western music scene, is Noeline Honter.

This multi-faceted Sri Lankan celebrity, who is now based in Australia, is still very much in the spotlight…as a singer, TV presenter and English training.

At present, she lives partly in Melbourne and Adelaide and says she is absolutely delighted to have the opportunity of sharing time with her son, Ryan, and family, and her daughter, Jaimee.

Noeline is a regular presenter for Channel 31 in Melbourne, the popular community channel which highlights ethnic diversity in Australia. She works for the Sri Lankan component of the channel, titled ‘The Sri Lanka Morning Show.’

In addition to conducting many interviews with prominent personalities, Noeline hosts her own regular music and talk show, entitled ‘Music Matters,’ which features music and ‘up close’ chats with Sri Lankan entertainers and musicians, around the world.

‘The Sri Lanka Morning Show’ has won several prestigious Australia-wide Awards, including the most recent, 2023 ‘Antenna’ award for the ‘Best Culturally and/or Linguistically Diverse Programme,’ presented by Channel 31.

A still from her new Sinhala video – Sohan, Trishelle, Noeline, Kumar, Roshan

While in Sri Lanka, Noeline conducted her own Academy of Training, and she continues with her English training, Down Under, conducting several training programmes online to students, in many countries, including Australia, Dubai, Sri Lanka, Seychelles, Qatar, UK, etc.

Her training programmes include English for IELTS, PTE, Presentation Skills, Pronunciation, and other English Disciplines.

This month (February), Noeline will commence training programmes for Australian migrants at TAFE, South Australia, which is the Australian government’s leading organisation for Vocational Education and Training relating to specific industries and occupations.

Due to her involvement in her multi-faceted career, Noeline says her time for commitment to her music is rather limited.

However, she still moves into action, whenever possible, and was seen in action at ‘Christmas with Noeline and Friends,’ which also featured guest stars Sohan Weerasinghe, Andrea Marr, Lozaine, and Thilini, backed by one of the leading Melbournian bands, Ebony.

Noeline was also involved in another sold out show, together with Melantha Perera.

And, the good news is that Noeline’s fans, in Melbourne, will have the opportunity of seeing her in action again at the Valentine’s Dinner Dance on the 17th of February, at the Grand on Princes. The show will also feature one of Sri Lanka’s top-notch bands, Mirage with Donald, Benjy, and Manilal Perera, together with Melbourne’s top-rated outfit, Replay-6.

Noeline will be doing a guest performance with Mirage as well as Replay-6.

In fact, Noeline has performed with Mirage on a number of occasions earlier, touring the Middle East with them and also joining them on stage at their regular gigs in Dubai, while Replay-6 has provided musical accompaniment for Noeline during her many earlier appearances in Australia.

Noeline has already been contacted for two performances in July this year. In addition, she has undertaken special private functions in Melbourne, where she will play the role, she is also reputed for…that of a compere. Among these is a very exclusive private function, in Sydney, later this year, where she will sing and compere.

Prior to her departure from Sri Lanka, Noeline recorded her first-ever pop song in Sinhala…a cover version of a Western song, done in her own inimitable style. The song also features Sohan, Trishelle, Jananath Warakagoda, Roshan De silva, Kumar De Silva and others.

The song gets extra colour with a special rap segment featuring one of Sri Lanka’s highly-rated pioneer rappers, the late ‘Rude Bwoy’ (Shiraz).

The song has been played on Channel 31 in Melbourne, and Noeline plans to release it on YouTube, and TV, in Sri Lanka, soon.

Noeline is very much into Gospel music these days, and she has composed several Gospel tracks, too. Two of these have already been finalised, and will be released in the coming weeks, together with an evocative cover of another Gospel song.

Noeline Honter’s colourful and very informative website provides readers with interesting details about her life and career. You can visit her website: noelinehonter.com

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.