Govt urged to fix issues and go ahead with Adani wind power project in Mannar

A group of sustainable energy activists convened a press conference in Colombo last week and called for resolving any issues with the Adani wind power project in Mannar and find pragmatic and sustainable ways to implement it without dragging on it.

“Sri Lanka is blessed with plenty of wind — a renewable energy resource with which cheaper electricity can be provided to consumers without spending millions of dollars on fossil fuel, but it is still an enigma why the government of Sri Lanka is dragging on finalizing the Adani wind power project in Mannar,” they said.

Indunil Bandara, Convener of the Youth for Renewable Energy Organization voiced concerns over the issue of increasing electricity unit tariffs faced by Sri Lankans. Bandara highlighted that nearly 25% of the average income is allocated to electricity consumption, posing significant challenges to households and businesses alike.

He questioned the country’s reluctance to embrace this particular project that could foster national development and progress.

“The surge in electricity bills is adversely impacting businesses and entrepreneurs, hindering economic growth and innovation. So, we can’t comprehend why the government is dragging its feet on regulatory approvals for green energy projects even when the advantages are clear,” he said.

Meanwhile, Rajitha Abeygunasekera, General Secretary of Sri Lanka Blue Green Alliance said, “Oil and coal claim more than 60% of the country’s electricity generation input mix, despite the country not lacking in Renewable Energy potentials, which impacts on national energy security heavily and is a major strain on the country’s trade budget with negative economic impact. The fact that only 4% of power needs are met by Renewable Energy, viewed along with the declared goal of achieving a 50% renewable electricity supply by 2030 under Long Term Generation Expansion Plan (clause 31 in “Environment” section) calls for major initiatives in Renewable Energy generation”, he said.

National Organizer of the Alliance, Vinshada Yasasmini said, “Renewable energy projects have gained greater importance especially after Sri Lanka policymakers decided that we need to be using 100 percent renewable energy by 2050. The 2016 “Blue Green Era” programme of Sri Lanka upholds our commitment to adopt climate smart strategies and low carbon footprint based on the Paris Agreement on Climate Change and Sustainable Development Goals. These policies call for significant levels of renewable energy projects for the country. So, the government needs to declare its position on Adani wind power project in Mannar without any vacillation.”

Mannar Socio and Economic Development Organization (MSEDO) has raised its concerns with the Central Environment Authority over the impacts of wind turbines on the bird population in Mannar coastal area.

India’s Adani Group, the developer of the $386 million, 250MW renewable energy project in Mannar, in a statement said recently that the company has underscored its commitment to environmental and avian population stewardship. They said their proposal includes the utilization of high-capacity turbines designed to minimize the project’s overall impact area.

Sri Lanka forex reserves improving, but global oil prices keep increasing

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.