New network of model cities planned under ‘Clean Sri Lanka’ initiative

Colombo, May 29 (Daily Mirror) - A series of policy decisions have been taken to establish a new network of Model Cities across Sri Lanka under the Government’s ‘Clean Sri Lanka’ initiative, with a focus on digital services, environmental sustainability and strong social values.

The decisions were made during a meeting of the Clean Sri Lanka Task Force held yesterday (28) at the Presidential Secretariat under the patronage of Secretary to the President Dr. Nandika Sanath Kumanayake.

As part of the programme, it was decided to obtain the full technical support of the University of Moratuwa to ensure the development process is implemented on a more practical and scientific basis.

A special expert committee chaired by Dr. Sithumini Ratnamalala of the University of Moratuwa was also appointed to formulate guidelines in line with international urban design standards. The committee includes several active members of the Clean Sri Lanka Task Force and scholars in the relevant fields.

According to the Government, the expert committee will initially study successful city development models from around the world and prepare scientific guidelines for the project. Several model cities are expected to be developed on a pilot basis under the first phase, following which a scientific framework will be introduced to support the modernisation of other cities islandwide.

Authorities stated that the Model Cities project will not be limited to physical infrastructure development, but will also focus on creating communities built on high moral and social values in line with the objectives of the Clean Sri Lanka national programme.

The initiative aims to promote courteous and responsible urban communities that uphold social harmony, mutual respect and environmentally sustainable lifestyles.

In addition, plans are underway to establish a technology-driven e-service network within the proposed cities to provide essential public services in an efficient and transparent manner.

Meanwhile, arrangements are also being made to appoint a panel of experts to develop and implement a scientifically-based waste management system across the island.