Dialog takes the lead in Anti-Bribery Governance with ISO 37001 certification

Dialog Axiata PLC, Sri Lanka’s #1 connectivity provider, has become the first company in Sri Lanka to achieve the ISO 37001:2016 certification for Anti-Bribery Management Systems (ABMS). This internationally recognised standard reflects Dialog’s steadfast commitment to promoting ethical business practices and effectively managing bribery risks, while ensuring full compliance with global anti-bribery regulations.

The company’s achievement of ISO 37001 certification reflects its steadfast commitment to Anti-Bribery and Anti-Corruption (ABAC) excellence, reinforcing its zero-tolerance policy through a comprehensive ABAC programme and rigorous anti-bribery measures. This internationally recognised standard provides a clear framework for implementing anti-bribery controls, enabling organisations to comply with global regulations, reduce legal risks, and bolster credibility with stakeholders. For Dialog, the certification further cements its dedication to fostering a culture of trust and transparency, enhancing internal controls and processes. As part of its proactive approach, Dialog has also instituted mandatory training on ABAC for all staff to ensure the highest standards are upheld across the organisation.

“Over the years, Dialog has maintained a strong commitment to Anti-Bribery and Anti-Corruption. Building on this foundation, we elevated ABAC to a strategic priority four years ago—fully integrating it into our operations,” said Supun Weerasinghe, Director/Group Chief Executive at Dialog Axiata PLC. “Achieving ISO 37001 certification is an important milestone in our ABAC journey, and as Sri Lanka’s first company to receive this certification, we are not only setting a new benchmark for corporate governance but also reinforcing our responsibility to uphold the highest standards of integrity in all our dealings.”

Dialog recently ranked first in the 2023 Transparency in Corporate Reporting (TRAC) assessment by Transparency International Sri Lanka, reflecting its commitment to integrity and anti-corruption efforts. This is further highlighted by Dialog’s invitation to the United Nations Global Compact’s Think Lab on Business Integrity, where it was the only company from Sri Lanka selected out of 25 global organisations. The Think Lab focuses on updating the ‘Anti-Corruption Ethics and Compliance Programme for Business’ handbook, setting strategies to prevent and combat corruption through a transformational governance approach to prevent and combat corruption within organisations, and across value chains globally.

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.