250 new bridges will be built to boost rural connectivity – President

President Ranil Wickremesinghe announced plans to construct 250 new bridges across Sri Lanka to enhance road connectivity and maximize the benefits of national development projects for rural communities.

The President made this announcement while addressing a celebration at the Shangri-La Hotel in Colombo today (03), marking the successful completion of 750 rural bridges by Janson Bridging International from the Netherlands over the period 2014-2024.

During his address, the  President emphasized the government’s commitment to improving the living conditions of people in areas connected by these bridges. He underscored the importance of ensuring that the benefits of economic development reach the poorest segments of society.

The celebration highlighted the significant impact of the completed 750 bridges in improving accessibility and fostering development in various rural parts of Sri Lanka, underscoring the collaborative efforts between Sri Lanka and the Netherlands in infrastructure development.

President Ranil Wickremesinghe highlighted the government’s goal to reduce multidimensional poverty to 10% by focusing on rural communities. He emphasized the critical role of infrastructure projects in rural areas in achieving this objective. The President expressed his gratitude to the government of the Netherlands for their support in this endeavour.

During the celebration at the Shangri-La Hotel in Colombo, President Wickremesinghe and the Ambassador of the Netherlands to Sri Lanka H.E. Bonnie Horbach were each presented with a commemorative plaque.

President Ranil Wickremesinghe set to resolve economic crisis and boost country’s economy – Sivanesathurai Chandrakanthan

Netherlands vs Nepal – the one match neither team can afford to lose

Halt illegal landfills and refrain from permitting new construction in the Kelani river valley – President instructs officials

Sri Lanka’s constitution mandates that the government should accord priority to Buddhism – President

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.