Shakira refutes “fake” images of her with Colombian presidential candidates

(FAROUT) - Shakira has spoken out against “fake” images of her supporting Colombian presidential candidates and has reaffirmed her commitment to “democracy” amidst the upcoming Colombian election.

The ‘Whenever, Wherever’ singer shared a statement with Billboard, revealing, “The images circulating of me supporting presidential candidates are fake. I do not support any candidate, nor have I authorised the use of my image in any campaign.”

The 49-year-old star was forced to shut down the rumours after fan accounts on social media posted fraudulent images alongside candidates Iván Cepeda and Aida Quilcué.

The statement is pertinent in light of unfounded reports that circulated earlier this year and attempted to link the musician to Cepeda. The false reports claimed that they are distant relatives.

Shakira has now distanced herself entirely from the candidates, sharing instead, “My commitment is to Colombia, to its democracy and to the right of every Colombian to choose freely”.

She added, “My wish is for these elections to proceed transparently and in a peaceful environment for all Colombians.”

The posts she was referring to have now been deleted, but read in part, “Shakira taught us that education is fundamental in combating inequality in our country.”

Elsewhere, Shakira has been confirmed as a co-headliner alongside Madonna and BTS for the first-ever World Cup Halftime Show, which will take place on July 19th at the MetLife Stadium in New Jersey.

Shakira’s last public statement, shared in April this year, revealed that the performer was “deeply saddened” after a Brazilian construction worker died while working on the stage for her upcoming show on Copacabana Beach in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil.

In memory of the 28-year-old, confirmed to be a local construction worker named Gabriel de Jesus Firmino, she added, “My heart goes out to his family, and loved ones.”

Looking ahead to the future, this September and October, Shakira will perform an 11-date residency in Madrid, Spain, at the custom-built Estadio Shakira, which has a capacity of 50,000.