From Negombo to Mahara

Saturday’s riot at the Mahara prison came as no surprise. It became obvious after the Negombo prison uprising, which claimed the lives of 22 inmates and 10 officers during two days of violence in early July, that there would be copycat riots elsewhere. If the prison authorities had kept an ear to the ground, they would have been able to take preemptive action at the first sign of trouble on Saturday. Was there a lapse on the part of the prison intelligence unit?

Rioters seized control of parts of the Mahara prison on Saturday and put up stiff resistance. Having apparently learnt from the Negombo prison violence, which went out of control, the government left nothing to chance on Saturday. It lost no time in deploying the Army, the Navy, the Air Force and the police together with the STF in large numbers and declaring a police curfew in the area in what looked like a shock-and-awe or rapid dominance operation, characterised by overwhelming power, extreme speed, and massive display of force. Some rioters were injured in the violence, and one of them succumbed to his injuries.

The presence of a large number of STF and armed forces personnel in full battle gear, the roar of armoured personnel carriers and the thudding of a chopper hovering low overhead with its searchlight sweeping the ground, would even have shattered the morale of a battle-hardened terrorist group. However, it took nearly 12 hours for the prison authorities, the police and the security forces to bring the situation under control; rioters had inflicted extensive damage on the prison by that time; they torched a newly-opened rehabilitation centre, the prison hospital and jailers’ offices. Public funds will have to be spent on prison repairs.

There is no gainsaying that the conditions of prisons must be improved and the legitimate grievances of the prison population redressed urgently. The government is duty bound to ensure the safety of all prisoners and safeguard their rights. However, nothing can be cited in extenuation of unleashing criminal violence in prisons and destroying public property. It has now been revealed that rioters tortured some prison officers to death during the Negombo prison violence. All those who are responsible for such criminal offences must be brought to justice.

Not all inmates are responsible for violent clashes in prisons. Criminal gangs involved in the narcotics trade usually instigate riots through their members behind bars. They cannot operate without inside help; some corrupt prison officers are in league with them. Eliminating this nexus is a prerequisite for ridding prisons of illegal activities.

There are other factors that have turned Sri Lankan prisons into the hellholes that they are. The current prison population is more than 40,000 while the accommodation capacity is about 11,000. That means the system is carrying roughly four times the number of prisoners it was designed to accommodate. Some facilities are reportedly operating at 300% to 400% occupancy. Overcrowding adversely impacts all aspects of prison administration.

When cells and common areas become congested, prisons become vulnerable to violence; sanitation, ventilation, medical care, food distribution, recreation and rehabilitation programmes become huge challenges. Most of all, congestion brings about serious security risks.

Worryingly, the vast majority of prison inmates are suspects. The World Prison Brief, using figures from Sri Lanka’s prison administration, has reported that about 73.8% of inmates are pre-trial or remand prisoners. SJB MP Ajith P. Perera has recently told Parliament that there are about 42,000 prisoners in the country at present, and out of them about 30,000 are drug offenders. More than 15,000 inmates are languishing behind bars, unable to obtain bail due to delays on the part of the Government Analyst’s Department, which is reportedly understaffed.

The Mahara prison riot could not have come at a worse time for the JVP-NPP administration. It was less than 10 days ago that the government defeated a motion of no confidence moved by the Opposition against Justice Minister Harshana Nanayakkara over the Negombo prison violence. It should stop bragging and get its act together. The Opposition has got hold of something to beat the government with. A government that is not capable of keeping the country’s prison system free from trouble is not worth its salt, some Opposition politicians have claimed. But the prison crisis is not of recent origin; it has worsened under successive governments. Therefore, the government and the Opposition ought to stop fighting political battles and concentrate on resolving prison issues.

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.