Kandy Ayurvedic Pharmacy wins Global Business Excellence 2025 Elite Series II Award

Kandy Ayurvedic Pharmacy Ltd of ‘Nuwara Osu’ fame, Sri Lanka’s iconic and trusted name in the manufacturing and distribution of state-of-the-art ayurvedic and herbal medications, has been awarded the prestigious Ayurvedic Product Manufacturing Excellence Award at the Global Business Excellence 2025 Elite Series II at a gala ceremony held at the BMICH recently. The selection was based on their remarkable achievements, commitment to innovation, and lasting impact on the industry.

“We are delighted to have been selected as the winner of this prestigious award, recognizing our rich heritage in Ayurveda, which is immersed in our culture and traditions. Our unwavering commitment to excellence, continuous innovation, and product quality has won the admiration of our customers not only in Sri Lanka but also in different parts of the world to which we export our products,” stated the Chairman of Kandy Ayurvedic Pharmacy Ltd – Ranjith Ehelepola Seneviratne.

“As the iconic and trusted name in ayurvedic products under the ‘Nuwara Osu’ brand, our commitment to excellence is further emphasized with our global accreditations such as ISO 9001:2015 and Good Manufacturing Practices (GMP) certifications,” he added.

Established 83 years ago in Kandy with the intention of expanding the ayurvedic practice not only in the province but also on a wider scale in the country, Kandy Ayurvedic Pharmacy Ltd is the oldest ayurvedic products manufacturer in Sri Lanka. Eminent Ayurvedic Physician Weda Muhandiram U. B. Narampanawa Rate Mahaththaya was elected as the first Chairman of Kandy Ayurvedic Pharmacy Ltd, together with 7 members who were also prominent ayurvedic physicians in the central province. Since its inception, the Kandy Ayurvedic Pharmacy has made a cultural discipline in the manufacture of ayurvedic herbal drugs in total compliance with Ayurveda pharmacopeia and traditional preservations.

Central Bank inaugurates “Financial Literacy Month 2025” from September 10

The Mall at Port City Colombo celebrates its first anniversary

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.