AIA Insurance continues partnership with WCIC as Platinum Partner of the Prathibhabhisheka Women Entrepreneur Awards 2026

AIA Insurance Lanka Director and Chief Executive Officer Chathuri Munaweera

AIA Insurance has once again partnered with Sri Lanka’s national chamber for women in business, the Women’s Chamber of Industry and Commerce (WCIC), as Platinum Partner of the WCIC Prathibhabhisheka - Women Entrepreneur Awards 2026. Recognised as the country’s leading platform for celebrating entrepreneurial excellence among women, the WCIC Prathibhabhisheka Awards honours individuals who have demonstrated exceptional leadership, resilience and business success while making meaningful contributions to national development.

This year marks five years of AIA partnering with WCIC, and this longstanding collaboration reflects AIA’s commitment to empowering women entrepreneurs, supporting inclusive economic growth and creating opportunities for all to thrive and lead in business. The event reinforced AIA’s belief in the transformative impact of women-led enterprises and its purpose of helping people live Healthier, Longer, Better Lives.

Commenting on the partnership, AIA Insurance Lanka Director and Chief Executive Officer Chathuri Munaweera, said: “True economic progress begins when women are empowered to thrive. As a long-standing advocate for women’s empowerment and economic inclusion, AIA is proud to stand alongside WCIC in this shared mission to uplift women across every corner of the nation. Recognising women as vital catalysts for economic growth, our objective is to equip female entrepreneurs to build and scale resilient businesses and shape a future of boundless potential.”

Over the years, AIA’s partnership with WCIC has helped elevate the visibility of women-led businesses while encouraging greater participation and leadership among women in entrepreneurship. The collaboration is part of AIA’s broader commitment to diversity, inclusion and sustainable development, while creating opportunities for women to thrive and contribute to the nation’s economic advancement.

The 2026 edition of the awards will recognise outstanding women entrepreneurs across Start-up, Micro, Small, Medium and Large business categories, together with a range of provincial, sector-specific and special recognition awards, culminating in the prestigious Woman Entrepreneur of the Year 2026 title. As applications open for this year’s program, AIA looks forward to celebrating the achievements of women entrepreneurs whose leadership continue to strengthen industries, fortify economies, build communities and contribute to a brighter future for Sri Lanka.