An economic Catch-22

President Anura Kumara Dissanayake is scheduled to perform an unenviable task tomorrow—presenting Budget 2026. The JVP-led NPP raised people’s expectations beyond measure to win elections, and it is now under tremendous pressure to honour its pledges.

State sector trade unions are demanding pay hikes and tax relief, as usual. The Government Medical Officers’ Association is prominent among them. It has called for a salary increase and a PAYE tax reduction for its members.

The ordinary people are also crying out for relief. The only way to ease their economic burden is for the government to reduce taxes and tariffs substantially. But the government will have to increase state expenditure significantly if it is to increase public sector salaries, reduce taxes and tariffs and grant other forms of relief. At the same time, it has to curtail expenditure substantially to boost state revenue, reduce the budget deficit and, above all, fulfil the IMF bailout conditions. This is a typical Catch-22 situation.

The government has been able to achieve a 30% revenue increase, according to media reports, which also reveal a 10% increase in state expenditure. Overall, this may look like a positive development, but capital expenditure has been curtailed. An increase in capital expenditure is a prerequisite for economic development, but it will cause the budget deficit to widen. There’s the rub.

There has been a 4.8% economic growth during the first eight months of the current year, according to some media reports, but experts inform us that the government will have to increase the growth rate at least up to 6% for the economy to remain robust and for the foreign debt repayment to commence in earnest in 2028. This is an uphill task.

Vehicle imports have given a big fillip to the ongoing efforts to increase state revenue, but it is not advisable for the government to rely solely thereon for that purpose. There will be a decrease in vehicle imports sooner or later, and they have led to a huge increase in the outflow of foreign exchange. Taxes and tariffs have already been pushed to the maximum, and further increases therein and/or new taxes are fraught with the danger of causing public anger to spill over onto the streets. The NPP came to power, promising to slash taxes and tariffs.

The government will have to introduce economic reforms expeditiously to achieve its revenue targets, spur growth and keep the economy on an even keel. But going by stiff resistance the Ceylon Electricity Board workers have put up against the proposed power sector restructuring, the government has apparently come up against a brick wall.

Loss-incurring state ventures are a drain on the state coffers, and the people have to pay through the nose to maintain them. President Dissanayake, speaking at a Ratnapura District Coordination Committee meeting, recently, declared that local government institutions should not engage in business activities, such as building supermarkets, as they were best left to the private sector. He revealed a plan to seek private sector participation in running the state-owned rest houses across the country. That declaration, which runs counter to statism, a hallmark of socialism, signalled an ideological  volte face on the part of the JVP, which calls itself a Marxist party. Yet the President’s contention at issue makes economic sense, at least where state ventures in this country are concerned. He said such infrastructural projects had become huge white elephants, causing staggering losses to the state. Curiously, the government has retained the loss-incurring national carrier as a state venture, and keeps on injecting billions of rupees in tax money into it annually.

It remains to be seen how the government will navigate the treacherous economic waters between Scylla and Charybdis.

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.