JXG earns 2025 Great Place To Work Certification™

JXG (Janashakthi Group) is proud to be Certified™ by Great Place To Work®. The prestigious award is based entirely on what current employees say about their experience working at JXG. This year, 97% of employees answered positively to the Trust Index™ survey statement “I would say this is a great place to work”.

Great Place To Work® is the global authority on workplace culture, employee experience, and the leadership behaviors proven to deliver market-leading revenue, increased employee retention and increased innovation by all.

“Great Place To Work Certification is a highly coveted achievement that requires consistent and intentional dedication to the overall employee experience,” says Sarah Lewis-Kulin, the Vice President of Global Recognition at Great Place To Work. She emphasizes that Great Place To Work Certification is the sole official recognition earned by the structured recent feedback of all employees regarding their organizational culture. “By successfully earning this recognition, it is evident that JXG stands out as one of the top companies to work for, providing a great workplace environment for its employees.”

“We’re proud to receive this recognition, as we know our strength comes from the happiness of our teams”, commented Wasanthi Stephen, Group Chief Human Resources Officer at JXG. “Being Great Place To Work Certified™ reaffirms our endeavors to invest in people. More importantly, it validates our continued efforts to create an inclusive culture for our employees that facilitates collaboration, innovation, and excellence.”

JXG employees rated the organization highly, citing a holistic environment dedicated to emphasizing employee voices, community engagement and most importantly a high-trust work environment. Demonstrating an exceptional performance across the Trust Index’s™ five focus areas, JXG employee perception excelled in workplace hospitality, inclusion and trust in management business acumen.

According to Great Place To Work US research, job seekers are 4.5 times more likely to find a great boss at a Certified great workplace. Additionally, employees at Certified workplaces are 93% more likely to look forward to coming to work, and are twice as likely to be paid fairly, earn a fair share of the company’s profits and have a fair chance at promotion. (JXG)

Record Remittances to Sri Lanka: Hidden Realities Behind the Headlines

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.