DigiEcon 2024 Investment Summit promises remarkable line-up of speakers from diverse industries

The DigiEcon 2024 Investment Summit, Sri Lanka’s premier technology and investment event organised by the Ministry of Technology and powered by Mastercard, is gearing up to host a remarkable line-up of speakers this year.

The highly anticipated summit, scheduled for 25 June, promises to unlock invaluable insights and power strategic alliances that will provide a platform to redefine success in the digital economy.

The Summit’s comprehensive agenda explores some of the most pressing issues and emerging trends shaping the digital economy, such as fintech, artificial intelligence, cybersecurity, and sustainable development among others.

The event will bring together global investors and venture capitalists, entrepreneurs, policymakers, and thought leaders from across the globe to explore investment opportunities and forge collaborations within Sri Lanka’s burgeoning tech industry.

The speaker line-up for this year includes Tenity Vice President Business Development and Sales – Asia Jonas Thürig, SBK Ventures Founder and Managing General Partner Sonia Kabir, Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation Senior Adviser Megha Jain, e27 Co-Founder and CEO Mohan Belani, Accelerate Asia General Partner Craig Dixon, and Mastercard Economics Institute Chief Economist – APAC David Mann.

The event will have Investment Promotion State Minister Dilum Amunugama as the chief guest, along with Central Bank of Sri Lanka Governor Dr. Nandalal Weerasinghe, Brandix Chairman Priyan Fernando, PeakXV Partners Managing Director Rajan Anandan, Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation Director – Digital Public Infrastructure Sanjay Jain, UNESCAP Economic Affairs Officer Heather Taylor-Strauss, and Microsoft South Asia COO Alok Lall.

Several other industry experts, including AI Taskforce Chairman Dr. Romesh Ranawana and Technology Ministry Secretary Dr. Dharmasri Kumaratunga, will also participate in the event, sharing their invaluable insights with a global audience.

“Our culture places a high value on professional qualifications, ensuring access to cutting-edge skills. From my experience in leading teams worldwide, I can confidently say that Sri Lankan professionals rank among the best which is evident by our impressive record of exported talent,” said Fernando.

“The global economy is experiencing accelerated digital transformation. The digital economy is growing exponentially. I wish Sri Lanka the very best as it embraces technology, engages in bilateral and multilateral partnerships, and ignites digital advancements for the country,” said Kabir.

The DigiEcon 2024 Investment Summit promises to be a landmark event, setting the stage for Sri Lanka’s ascent as a hub for technological innovation and economic growth.