Spa Ceylon’s immersive Butterfly Paradise takes flight

Spa Ceylon, proudly unveiled a groundbreaking initiative – Sri Lanka’s first-ever immersive multi-sensory experience, “Butterfly Paradise,” at One Galle Face Mall. Coinciding with the Butterfly Avurudu Gallery from April 5th to 7th, 2024, this visionary project aimed to immerse visitors in the captivating world of butterflies while championing butterfly conservation.

Sri Lanka with a rich biodiversity, is home to over 248 species of exotic butterflies, with over 76 facing extinction.

Recognizing the urgency of conservation, Spa Ceylon took action from as early as 2017 partnering up with the Sri Lanka Wildlife Conservation Society. Over the years they created a Butterfly reserve in Wasgamuwa, which managed to naturally invite over 52 species, including 8 endemic butterflies to make their settlements around the reserves. This initiative was a continuation of that effort, and they are currently working together to build butterfly gardens in Weheragala forest reserves through habitat enrichment and restoration. They aim to build advocacy on increasing local knowledge of butterflies and the important ecological role of butterflies especially as pollinators that benefit farming communities.

In advocating such conservation efforts, the immersive butterfly experience marked a first-of-its-kind endeavor in Sri Lanka. Combining relaxation and education, guests were treated with a multi-sensory revitalizing journey with the wellness attributes of Spa Ceylon’s De-Stress range resulting in a harmonizing experience along with using cutting-edge digital technology like augmented reality to convey the message and the story. The attendees were immersed in an unforgettable experience that heightened their senses and deepened their understanding of butterfly conservation.

Speaking at the event, Spa Ceylon Co-founder Shiwantha Dias said “As an Ayurveda brand, we believe that ‘balance’ is of utmost importance to the wellness of our planet and its people, this immersive experience isn’t just a representation of the butterfly conservation initiative by Spa Ceylon thus far; it also symbolizes our overall commitment to nature conservation, moving forward.”

Shalin Balasuriya, Co-founder of Spa Ceylon also shared his thoughts: “Our brand’s dedication to conservation drives us to continually innovate to create impactful engagement with our community. This immersive experience will not just promote conservation but help showcase Sri Lanka’s status as a butterfly paradise which will be a message we take from Sri Lanka to the world through Spa Ceylon’s global presence.”

Singer Sri Lanka recognized as a Strategic Alliance Partner at Sony’s Annual BPC in Singapore

Spa Ceylon wins coveted ‘Global Best Beauty Product’ at World Spa Awards 2023

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.