Sri Lanka woos U.S. investments for Colombo Port development

Colombo, June 30 (Daily Mirror) - Sri Lanka has wooed U.S. investment in the development of the Colombo port and integrated infrastructure at a recent summit in Washington, a Deputy Minister said yesterday.

The Colombo port is one of the biggest strategic assets of Sri Lanka, with the government planning for the development of a logistics park and the West Container Terminal (WTC) 2. Deputy Minister of Ports and Aviation Janitha Kodituwakku, who attended a summit on maritime cooperation in the U.S said that the Sri Lankan delegation presented the investment opportunities for the American business sector in the development and expansion of the Colombo port.

According to him, the U.S. business community is well aware of the strategic value of Sri Lanka.

“We are going to seek investments for the development of our ports. We want to develop the proposed logistics park adjacent to the port,” he said.

The port operates five major container terminals managed through state ownership and public-private partnerships at the moment. The latest was the West Container Terminal 1, which was commissioned last year.

Sri Lanka has advanced its maritime security cooperation in recent months. Recently, aboard SLNS Gajabahu at the Port of Colombo, U.S. Assistant Secretary of State for South and Central Asian Affairs Paul Kapur announced that the United States would provide Fleet Broadband satellite communications technology to the Sri Lanka Navy, strengthening maritime connectivity along some of the world’s busiest shipping routes.

The Assistant Secretary Paul Kapur, along with Commander of U.S. Pacific Air Forces (PACAF ) General Kevin Schneider transferred 10 American-made TH-57 (Bell 206) helicopters to the Sri Lanka Air Force. These aircraft will help modernise Sri Lanka's aviation capabilities, strengthen search and rescue operations, and train the next generation of @airforcelk pilots— another tangible step in helping Sri Lanka develop the modern, professional, and self-reliant forces needed to address today's security challenges, according to a post on X by the U.S. Embassy in Colombo.

General Kevin Schneider, in an address, here said it goes without saying that this is a consequential time in the region and the world, and Sri Lanka's strategic position makes the readiness of its armed forces vital, not only to its sovereignty, but also to regional stability.

“Our shared commitment to a free and open Indo-Pacific is tested daily, and it is our collective duty to ensure this region remains secure and prosperous for all. Our partnership rests on a foundation of mutual respect and a shared vision for security,” he said.