‘Simply the best’ back after four years

Safoora Naseem, a Maldivian, did create a big impact in the scene here when she resided in this part of the world, especially during her son’s schooling days.

Better known as Sheru, she impressed many with her singing, and stage act, and was tagged ‘simply the best’ because of her awesome version of Tina Turner’s hit song ‘Simply the Best’.

Sheru was back in the island, after four years, just to do a guest spot of 30 minutes at a function held in Colombo last month.

“It was simply great to be back after so long a period and I enjoyed my very short stay.

“Perhaps, I may come this way again…maybe next month for another guest performance, but nothing has been finalised as yet.”

Recollecting the past, she said that her very first band was Aquarius, led by dynamic bassist Benjy Ranabahu.

She was a permanent member of Aquarius and also performed with them in Dubai.

“I owe my present position, as a singer/entertainer, to Aquarius. They made me a star.”

In addition to Aquarius, she was also associated with Mirage and N-Chord.

“I did guest spots with many other local outfits, and I, especially, loved performing with Sohan and the X-Periments.

“They were excellent and they made me feel so comfortable on stage.”

Sheru also mentioned the sing-along happenings organised by Shiromi Perera and Rhythm World Dance Studio.

They were held annually and Sheru was always in the spotlight at these events, performing with Sohan & The X-Periments.

She was also seen in action at many corporate functions and the setup here was turning out to be really good for Sheru.

Unfortunately, her singing career came to an abrupt end in Sri Lanka due to the Covid-19 pandemic and she had to return home.

“I love Sri Lanka so much that one day I may make your beautiful country my home. I really miss Sri Lanka.

“And, oh, how can I forget! I’m truly grateful to you and The Island newspaper for the publicity given to my singing career which has given me this star status.”

Sheru currently performs with a Sri Lankan guitarist/keyboardist in a resort in the Maldives.

For the record Sheru is the sister of the former Vice-President of the Maldives, Faisal Naseem.

Breaking the Binary: Embracing gender diversity and inclusivity in universities

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.