Sri Lanka Archaeology Dept to continue excavations in the East: Minister

ECONOMYNEXT – Sri Lanka’s Department of Archaeology is to continue laying claim to land in the east of the island for the purpose of furthering archeological understanding, Minister of Buddhashasana, Religious and Cultural Affairs Vidura Wickremenayake has said recently to reporters in Colombo.

“Is it something that we shouldn’t do? We have been very myopic on these things. If you look at the point of view of a racist, then we may not be able to get along or go ahead with these types of preservations,” he said in response to a question on the ongoing tensions in the Province over land claims by the Department.

Wickremanayaka was speaking at a press briefing to announce a new bill aimed at formally managing the discovery and preservation of the nation’s antiquities and archaeological heritage.

The Department of Archaeology has been accused of encroaching on land belonging to non-Buddhists in the North and East over claims of Buddhist historicity.

“By preventing the Archeology Department from going ahead with their excavations and other processes I don’t know what they gain. They may make a claim that no, this is our land. Ok, fine but can we erase history? We cannot.”

According to information provided by the Department to Economy Next in 2023, 996 archeological sites had been identified in Ampara and Batticaloa Districts in 2023.

The Department has identified a total of 329 archaeological sites in Anuradhapura, Polonnaruwa, Galle and Kandy Districts on its official website.

In June 2020, former president Gotabaya Rajapaksa appointed a presidential task force, comprising of Buddhist monks and retired army personnel, for Archaeological Heritage Management in the Eastern Province through a gazette to “preserve the historical heritage of Sri Lanka”.

The Director General of the Department of Archaeology Professor Anura Manatunga tendered his resignation in June 2023, after a meeting convened between the Department, Tamil Members of Parliament and President Ranil Wickremesinghe, over the acquisition of land. (Colombo/Mar18/2024)