300,000 small businesses to be trained in Asia on digital safety, 5000 in Sri Lanka

Google.org, Google’s philanthropic arm, is providing $15M to The Asia Foundation to launch the APAC Cybersecurity Fund in partnership with CyberPeace Institute and Global Cyber Alliance to bolster cyber capabilities of 300,000 underserved micro and small businesses, nonprofits, and social enterprises. Working with implementing organizations and universities across the region, The Asia Foundation aims to equip local communities and students via upskilling tools and cyber clinics to protect against online risks. The initiative will span 13 locations, including Bangladesh, Hong Kong, India, Indonesia, Japan, Korea, Malaysia, Pakistan, Philippines, Singapore, Sri Lanka, Thailand, and Vietnam.

Asia and the Pacific have become “ground zero” for cybercrimes, recording the highest number of cyber incidents worldwide in 2023. The threats and impacts are more alarming for small businesses. Research shows that more than half of small businesses in the region have experienced a cyber incident in the past years, with malware attacks being the most common.

Incidents like this threaten operations, result in revenue loss, and negatively impact a business’ reputation. More than 70% of small business owners express fears that serious cyber incidents could potentially end their business. With cyber threats on the rise, it is important for entrepreneurs and internet users to have the skills to understand and assess potential risks, and protect themselves and their business against malicious activities and other threats in the cyberspace.

Seeking to build a digital ecosystem that is inclusive and safe for all, the APAC Cybersecurity Fund, through The Asia Foundation, will connect small businesses and vulnerable groups to local training opportunities and resources to build and strengthen their digital defense. With the support of local implementing partners, the initiative will deliver cyber clinics and upskilling activities in Bangladesh, Hong Kong, India, Indonesia, Japan, Korea, Malaysia, Pakistan, Philippines, Singapore, Sri Lanka, Thailand, and Vietnam. &quot;We are proud to support The Asia Foundation in equipping vulnerable organizations, such as small and medium enterprises and nonprofits, across Asia Pacific with essential cybersecurity skills and resources to combat the growing cyber threats as they navigate through the digital economy. By leveraging global partners, local expertise and tailored training programs, the APAC Cybersecurity Fund adopts a collaborative approach to foster cyber resilience at the grassroots level.

Related Topics:000 small businesses to be trained in Asia on digital safety3005000 in Sri LankaGoogle.org

Spa Ceylon wins coveted ‘Global Best Beauty Product’ at World Spa Awards 2023

International ‘Mother Language’ Day and Multilingual Education in Sri Lanka

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.