Campaign finance laws should come into effect 3 months before polls – March 12 Movement

March 12 Movement Co-Convener Rohana Hettiarachchi says parties have already spent over half of their election budget before campaign finance laws come into effect

Says it’s troubling to note Govt. machinery is being heavily misused for political campaigning

TISL Director Nadishani Perera warns public servants against political campaigning to avoid legal troubles

Hashtag Generation Darshatha Gamage says there is a rise in misleading information targeting polls and citizens should be rational and prudent online

IRES Executive Director Manjula Gajanayake says Presidential candidates should provide public access to their asset declarations

People’s Action for Free and Fair Elections (PAFFREL) Executive Director and March 12 Movement Co-Convener Rohana Hettiarachchi has emphasised the necessity for Sri Lanka’s new campaign finance laws to take effect at least three months before nominations are called for an election.

Hettiarachchi pointed out that parties have already spent over half of their election budget, even though elections have not yet been announced. Currently, the law comes into effect only when nominations are called.

He made these remarks during a press conference in Colombo last week, where he addressed developments related to the upcoming Presidential Election, including attempts to intimidate the judiciary and disregard judicial decisions.

Hettiarachchi said while the Election Commission of Sri Lanka has already engaged with stakeholders such as the Department of Government Printing, Police, and the Postal Department to conduct the election, there are instances of misusing ruling power and public funds in favour of one candidate.

“Government machinery is heavily misused for political campaigning, which is troubling. The Election Commission has the authority to act against such instances,” he said.

Hettiarachchi also noted that the Government has been making deliberate attempts to create uncertainty about holding the election and urged the ECSL to declare the Presidential Election on the first date it gains constitutional power to do so, ending speculations of delay.

Meanwhile also addressing the press conference, Transparency International Sri Lanka Executive Director Nadishani Perera denounced the President’s attempts to undermine the separation of powers between the Executive and the Judiciary with statements that create a chilling effect on judges.

“The President’s recent remarks in Parliament proposing a Select Committee to review the Supreme Court’s determination of a Bill is a clear override of executive powers. Additionally, the Justice Minister made derogatory remarks about the judiciary over personal issues. The Judiciary acts as the guardian of citizens’ rights, providing checks and balances against the Legislature’s abuse of power through judicial review of bills. The Legislature is not above the Constitution. The President’s defiant criticism of the Supreme Court’s verdict disturbs the balance of power and sets a bad precedent. The March 12 Movement calls on citizens to stand against democratic backsliding and urges the President and the Government to use their powers responsibly,” she said.

Commenting on the upcoming polls, Perera said the Government has received financial and other resources from international donors for anti-corruption reforms but has been slow to implement these reforms compared to the speed of tax increases. “Public servants should avoid political campaigning. No politician will rescue them if they face legal action,” she warned.

Meanwhile, Hashtag Generation former Head of Programs Darshatha Gamage urged the public to consume social media responsibly during the election period.

“There is a rise in misleading information targeting the election. Citizens should be rational and prudent online. The Government has recently violated people’s rights. The country needs people-oriented governance that respects the democratic framework and the Constitution,” he said.

Also addressing the press conference, Institute for Democratic Reforms and Electoral Studies (IRES) Executive Director Manjula Gajanayake expressed dismay at the abuse of public funds for political campaigning before the election.

“Citizens should act as election observers to ensure a free and fair election. The Election Commission has the power to investigate election law violations on its own accord. This is the first election where campaign finance laws will apply, and about 150,000 youths who have recently turned 18 will vote. This election may also see significant use of Artificial Intelligence (AI),” he noted.

“The Basnayake Nilame of the Ruhunu Kataragama Maha Devalaya has declared his assets and liabilities, setting a commendable example. Presidential candidates should also provide public access to their declarations,” he added.