CEAT extends premium ‘SIS’ retail experience to Kelaniya and Horana

Sri Lanka’s top tyre brand CEAT has extended its premium retail experience to Kelaniya and Horana, with the opening of new concept Shop-in-Shop (SIS) outlets in these bustling towns.

The 11th and 12th CEAT SIS outlets in Sri Lanka are located at Jayantha Tyre Traders at No. 408, Kandy Road, Kelaniya and at Lal Tyre House at No. 243, Panadura – Anguruwatota Road, Horana, providing vehicle owners in these areas an exclusive and premium purchase experience.

These outlets will offer an extensive range of CEAT tyres with attractive discounts, tyre care and technical expertise, as well as a combination of services such as wheel balancing and alignment, nitrogen and air pumps for tyre inflation, alloy wheels and automobile batteries. A distinctive feature of every CEAT SIS outlet is its own customer lounge.

Part of a distribution channel expansion strategy by Sri Lanka’s highest-selling tyre brand, the CEAT SIS concept is designed to drive brand premiumisation and enhance customer experience, and entails demarcating a dedicated area for CEAT branded tyres within existing multi-brand dealer premises.

CEAT Kelani Holdings furnishes the customer lobby and reception areas of this private space to augment customer comfort. Additionally, the company invests in illuminated brand boards in-store and outside for enhanced brand visibility, roofing, glazing, lighting and furniture, as well as innovative product display racks to emphasise the tyre offerings available with the channel partner. Besides enhancing the visibility and positioning of the brand, this model is known to increase the channel partners’ revenue.

These premium retail outlets are also designed to bring special focus on providing all tyre-related services for passenger cars and SUVs, for which CEAT Kelani produces a range of high-performance radial tyres that are engineered in Germany.

CEAT’s investments in the new distribution channel upgrade program in Sri Lanka have resulted in the opening of the three flagship Customer Invested Dealer Operated (CIDO) outlets at Etul Kotte, Madampe and Mirihana, as well as the opening of SIS outlets at Borella, Pamankada, Malabe, Colombo 14 (two outlets), Hanwella, Kurunegala, Colombo 7, Miriswatte, Batticaloa, and now in Kelaniya and Horana.

CEAT’s emergence as the top brand in Sri Lanka’s tyre sector is the result of substantial investments over several years that have seen not just exponential increases in volumes but expansion of the product range, the deployment of new technology and quantum improvements in quality. The company’s new retail concepts are designed to ensure the customer experience keeps pace with the brand’s growth.