SJB suggests alternative plan for public debate with NPP

SJB and NPP continue to exchange rhetorical challenges over public debate

SJB MP S. M. Marikkar proposes a debate between party Economic Councils led by party leaders

NPP’s Nalinda Jayatissa says NPP wants leaders’ debate, open to Economic Councils debate if necessary

Samagi Jana Balawegaya (SJB) MP S. M. Marikkar proposed yet another alternative plan for a public debate between the SJB and the National People’s Power (NPP) party yesterday by suggesting the parties hold a debate between the economic councils of both parties, led by their respective party leaders Sajith Premadasa and Anura Kumara Dissanayake.

Politicians from the SJB and NPP have continued to exchange rhetorical challenges regarding a public debate with no concrete plan to hold one being announced

“It seems Anura Dissanayake is somewhat hesitant,” said MP S. M. Marikkar. “If that’s the case, we could hold a debate between the SJB economic council, including Sajith Premadasa, and the NPP economic council, featuring Anura Dissanayake, to discuss issues related to the economy, development and Governance,” he said.

Marikkar said the public can then determine which party presents the better and more practical plan for the country. “The SJB economic council and leader Sajith Premadasa are prepared to attend the debate on any given day,” he said.

The SJB has proposed a public debate between the economic councils of the two parties, but the NPP has countered by calling for a debate between the leaders of the two parties, Sajith Premadasa and Anura Kumara Dissanayake.

In response to the SJB’s claims that the NPP is avoiding the debate, NPP Executive Council member Dr. Nalinda Jayatissa yesterday reaffirmed the NPP’s willingness to participate in a debate between the two parties. Dr. Jayatissa emphasised that, given the upcoming presidential election, a debate should first take place between Sajith Premadasa and Anura Kumara Dissanayake.

However, he added that if the SJB has no interest in a debate between the two leaders, a debate between the two parties’ economic committees could also be an option. He affirmed that his party is prepared for either scenario. In early April SJB MPs Harsha de Silva and Nalin Bandara issued a challenge for a public debate to the economic council of the NPP, which includes members Sunil Handunnetti, Prof. Anil Jayasinghe and Seetha Bandara.

In response, Handunnetti accepted the challenge on behalf of the NPP and said however the party was keen to hold a debate between the leaders of both parties instead of between the economic councils. He requested the SJB to formally extend its invitation to the party in writing, which it has failed to do yet.