Prudent policy adjustments could help manage a local growth rate drop – CBSL Governor

‘Sri Lanka recorded a growth of five percent or more but due to the Middle East crisis this growth rate could be expected to drop. However, this decline could be managed effectively through the adoption of prudent policy adjustments, Central Bank Governor Dr. Nandalal Weerasinghe said at the monthly CBSL monetary policy review meeting. The meet was held at the CBSL head office in Colombo yesterday.

The Governor said that the CBSL had decided to increase the Overnight Policy Rate (OPR) by 100 basis points, bringing it to 8.75 percent.

Following this adjustment, the Standing Deposit Facility Rate (SDFR) and the Standing Lending Facility Rate (SLFR), which are linked to the OPR, have been increased to 8.25 percent and 9.25 percent, respectively. The decision comes after a careful evaluation of evolving domestic and global macroeconomic conditions, Dr Weerasinghe explained.

Dr. Weerasinghe added: ‘The tightening of the monetary policy stance is primarily driven by mounting inflationary pressures. Heightened geopolitical tensions in the Middle East have kept global commodity prices, especially petroleum, elevated.

‘This has led to sharp upward adjustments in domestic energy prices, pushing Sri Lanka’s year-on-year headline inflation to 5.4 percent in April 2026.

‘While the recent spike is largely supply-driven, strengthening domestic demand, evidenced by continued credit expansion, credit-driven imports and robust economic activity—has further accelerated short-term inflation expectations.

‘The external sector has also faced amplified headwinds in recent weeks. A widening merchandise trade deficit, driven by increased fuel import costs and a slowdown in tourism earnings, resulted in a modest external current account surplus for the first quarter of 2026.

‘Additionally, speculative activities led to notable depreciation pressures on the Sri Lankan rupee, though conditions have since stabilized. Despite these pressures and ongoing foreign debt servicing, Sri Lanka’s Gross Official Reserves stood at a resilient USD 6.8 billion by the end of April 2026, a figure that includes a swap facility from the People’s Bank of China.

‘Looking ahead, headline inflation is projected to remain above the Central Bank’s target of 5 percent in the near term before stabilizing.

‘To counter potential second-round effects on inflation from energy price hikes and unchecked private sector credit growth, the Board deemed a restrictive policy stance necessary to maintain long-term domestic price stability. Upcoming multilateral inflows and government stabilization measures are expected to support the external sector and we will continue to monitor incoming data ahead of the next scheduled monetary policy review on July 22, 2026.’

Dijital Team Sri Lanka reaffirms commitment to continuous employee growth through partnership with LinkedIn Learning

New Tilapia processing centre opens economic frontiers for Northern women

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.