SLIM and SLT Mobitel collaborate to empower agripreneurs and enhance national agri output

The Sri Lanka Institute of Marketing (SLIM) and SLT-Mobitel are proud to announce the successful commencement of the second phase of the “Agri Saviya” program, a pioneering initiative aimed at revolutionising the agricultural sector in Sri Lanka. The event at the Kandy City Centre (KCC) marked a significant step forward in leveraging technology to improve the quality and quantity of national agricultural output.

Delivering the welcome speech, Dr. Muditha Hewawanitunga, Project Chairman and Executive Committee member of the Sri Lanka Institute of Marketing (SLIM), commended the participants for choosing a career path as agripreneurs. “Your decision to embark on this journey is commendable, as agripreneurship is vital for the future of our nation’s agriculture,” said Dr. Hewawanitunga. He highlighted the importance of this collaboration with SLT-Mobitel, noting that it provides a robust platform to elevate the national agricultural output through the integration of advanced technology.

Charaka Perera, General Manager Marketing of Mobitel, elaborated on the initiative’s goal to bring various value additions to the business community. “Through this national initiative, we aim to enhance the business community with different value additions. Marketing, in particular, plays a crucial role in adding significant value to the customer,” said Perera. He also emphasised the role of digitalisation and various technological enablers in advancing the agricultural sector. “Digitalization and technological advancements are key to empowering the agricultural community and enhancing national output,” he added. Charaka Perera is also the Founder Chairman & Creator of ‘Agri Saviya’ National Initiative as well as a Board Member of Agripreneurs Forum

Sharing his views about this initiative, SLIM President Gayan Perera stated, “Our mission is to transform Sri Lanka’s agriculture by empowering agripreneurs with cutting-edge technology and innovative marketing strategies. Together, we can cultivate a thriving agricultural sector contributing to national prosperity.”

“By fostering collaboration and harnessing the power of technology, we can create a sustainable agricultural ecosystem that drives national growth and resilience,” emphasised Dr. Dilhan Sampath Jayatilleke, SLIM Vice President – Events and Sustainability Projects.

Ms. Indika Herath, Assistant General Manager (AGM) – Central Operations at SLIM added, “We initiated this program to specifically empower entrepreneurs in the agricultural sector. By providing them with the necessary knowledge and support, we aim to foster innovation and sustainability, which are crucial for the growth and resilience of our national agriculture.”

The Chief Guest, Thusitha Wijesena, (Kandy City Center) KCC Chairman, praised the efforts of SLIM and Mobitel in undertaking a national responsibility to elevate the profile of the agricultural community. “The dedication shown by SLIM and Mobitel in supporting our agripreneurs is truly commendable. This initiative not only enhances the agricultural sector but also strengthens the backbone of our economy,” stated Wijesena.

Softlogic Stockbrokers’ investment platform “StockGPT” enhanced with Azure OpenAI Service

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.