Sri Lanka to announce vehicle import relaxation ‘under certain limits’

ECONOYMEXT – Sri Lanka will soon make an announcement on relaxing vehicle imports, subject to certain constraints, Minister Nalinda Jayatissa said.

“The decision on vehicle imports was made after taking into account the economic situation, our economic targets, our reserves and with the close supervision of the Ministry of Finance,” Minister Jayatissa told reporter in Colombo Tuesday.

“The relaxation of vehicle imports should be to be understood in the context of those limits. Do not give various messages and mislead the public.

“Which vehicles will be allowed to be imported will be announced by the finance ministry soon. I am again saying against that import controls will be relaxed under some limits (yam-yam see-ma va-la-ta ya-tath-va).”

Minister Jayatissa was responding to a question on advertisements by vehicle importers and deposits collected.

Banning imports especially those which bring high taxes, after printing money to target a policy rate, has been described as a ‘cascading policy error’ by critics.

The banning of highly taxed imports reduces state revenues, pushing up interest rates as the borrowing requirement goes up and requiring more money to target the policy rate.

Sri Lanka banned vehicle imports along with 3000 other items, rates were cut with printed money in 2020 through direct and open market operations.

However, forex shortages and an external default anyway happened as the printed money to target a policy rate flowed into other imports, especially, building materials and capital equipment as central bank re-financed loans went to areas that were not controlled.

Restrictions were also placed in 2018 with LC margins pushed to 200 percent as money was printed to target policy rates even as budget deficits were brought down with higher taxes.

Sri Lanka controls imports in ‘Nixon-shock’ move to protect soft-pegged rupee

A central bank with a policy rate that spends reserves without allowing market rates to rise (sterilizes interventions with open market operations) eventually runs out of reserves and the exchange rate also collapses.

Neither floating exchange rate nor consistent hard pegs use central bank reserves for private imports or sterilizes reserve outflows. (Colombo/Dec11/2024)