HNB Assurance Emerges Insurance Sector Winner at the National Business Excellence Awards 2025

HNB Assurance PLC was recognized with two significant accolades at the National Business Excellence Awards 2025, hosted by the National Chamber of Commerce of Sri Lanka. HNB Assurance was crowned Winner in the Insurance Sector, while also being awarded Runner-Up in Excellence in Local Market Reach, a prestigious national-level award, affirming the company’s strong performance, both in terms of delivering business excellence within the insurance industry and deepening its presence across diverse local markets through impactful customer engagement and service delivery.

The National Business Excellence Awards is a premier awards program that evaluates and celebrates business entities in Sri Lanka that have demonstrated excellence across key dimensions including leadership, market performance, corporate governance, capacity building and social responsibility. The dual recognition marks a major milestone in HNB Assurance’s journey of consistent performance and commitment to delivering value to its stakeholders.

Speaking on the achievement, Lasitha Wimalaratne, Executive Director / Chief Executive Officer of HNB Assurance PLC, stated “Being recognized at such a respected platform is both an honour and a humbling reminder of the responsibility we carry. Winning the award for the Insurance Sector reflects our strength as a business, the strategic clarity of our vision, and the tireless dedication of our people. Meanwhile, being acknowledged for Excellence in Local Market Reach at a National Level, is a testament to efforts made by our sales force and the impact we have created across Sri Lanka from urban centres to underserved rural communities. Our purpose has always been to protect lives and empower futures and these recognitions inspire us to aim even higher. Finally, my sincere thanks to the National Chamber of Commerce of Sri Lanka for providing this esteemed platform and for recognizing our efforts, honours such as these inspire us to continue making a meaningful difference.”

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.