Support for President from some SLPPers was expected – Namal

SLPP National Organiser Namal Rajapaksa says differing views within parties is a common feature in SL’s Presidential election history

Stresses SLPP has a responsibility to represent SL’s leftist camp against UNP and protect party ideology

Blames current political scenario for some SLPP MPs extending support to Wickremesinghe

Calls on SLPP members to continue supporting their camp and set aside all differences

Sri Lanka Podujana Peramuna (SLPP) National Organiser Namal Rajapaksa has said the decision by certain party members to support President Ranil Wickremesinghe in the upcoming election was anticipated.

Addressing the media yesterday after several key meetings at the party headquarters, Rajapaksa remarked that differing views and discussions between and within parties is a common feature in the country’s Presidential election history.

He said the SLPP is continuing to work on strengthening the party and must focus on ensuring the success of its ideology and stance rather than prioritising the victory of an individual candidate. “We have always been in the anti-UNP camp. Today, we will continue to stand in opposition to the UNP,” he said, while flanked by MPs D.V. Chanaka, Tissa Kuttiarachchi, Sumith Udukumbura, and D. Weerasingha.

Rajapaksa stressed the SLPP has the responsibility to represent the leftist camp against the UNP.

He emphasised that it is important to remember that Presidential elections are about connecting with the people and for garnering preferential votes. “Some may think this is a good time to attract preferential votes for an upcoming election, but this is not that type of election. Historically, the winning candidate has been the one with a national program. We have such a program,” he said.

When asked about a majority of SLPP MPs extending their support to the President, Rajapaksa said it doesn’t matter whether it is a majority or a minority. He mentioned that those who met with the President did so after meeting with party members at his residence, revisiting them the night before, and even meeting with him again yesterday morning. “There are some doubts in their minds on the matter,” he said, attributing it to the current political context.

He called on them to continue supporting the SLPP camp to protect it and set aside all differences. “Let us be together,” he said.

Rajapaksa said the SLPP will continue to deliberate on its Presidential candidacy. He clarified that the decision to field its own candidate is a policy stance, not a position for or against any politician, whether it be Wickremesinghe, Namal Rajapaksa, or another individual.

He emphasised the importance of protecting the camp’s ideology and not undermining it, especially at this critical juncture, to prevent the ideology of another camp from prevailing.