CSE’s implementation of shortened settlement cycle for equity trades proves successful

The Colombo Stock Exchange’s (CSE) implementation of the shortened settlement cycle for equity trades has been executed seamlessly with the first settlement under the T+ 2 cycle taking place on 12th June 2024, marking a significant milestone in Sri Lankan Capital Market operations. Investors have experienced swift payment processing, receiving their funds within two days for the first time since the cycle reduction.

Following collaborative efforts with the Securities and Exchange Commission of Sri Lanka (SEC) and industry stakeholders, the transition to a T+2 settlement cycle on June 10th, 2024, has yielded tangible results. Investors now benefit from expedited fund transfers and security exchanges, with transactions settling within a shorter timeframe.

Senior Vice President – Enterprise Risk Management & Post Trade Settlement, Ms. Dulani Warnakulasooriya mentioned, “Moving to a shorter settlement cycle has proved to increase the settlement efficiency. This change will further benefit the market participants by freeing up working capital and lowering the collateral requirements.”

The successful implementation of the shortened settlement cycle not only reduces operational risks but also amplifies market liquidity. Further, this achievement underscores the effectiveness of the CSE’s strategic initiatives in enhancing investor experience.

Economic Transformation Bill first step towards economic stability – President

Softlogic Life Insurance launches share buyback plan amidst profit-takings in some counters

Share market forges ahead in an optimistic spirit; turnover exceeds Rs. 3 billion

Share market driven by retail investors as IMF third tranche hopes rise

Share price appreciations in banking sector counters as indices rise

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.