Colombo Dockyard delivers 10th vessel in Misje Eco Bulker newbuilding series

Colombo Dockyard Managing Director/CEO Thimira Godakumbura and Misje EcoBulk AS, Norway Owner Roald Misje exchange the delivery protocols in the presence of Ports and Civil Aviation Minister Anura Karunathilaka, Deputy Minister Janith Kodithuwakku, Economic Development Deputy Minister Nishantha Jayaweera, Indian High Commissioner Santosh Jha, and Senior Economic Adviser to the President Duminda Hulangamuwa

Norwegian owner names vessel ‘Misje Kandy’ inspired by last capital of the Sri Lankan monarchy as tribute to Colombo Dockyard

Colombo Dockyard PLC (CDPLC) has delivered the 10th vessel in the Misje Eco Bulker newbuilding series, with Misje EcoBulk AS of Norway Owner Roald Misje naming the vessel ‘Misje Kandy,’ inspired by the last capital of the Sri Lankan monarchy as a tribute to Colombo Dockyard, the Sri Lankan shipbuilder and the local owners’ representative site team.

The ceremonial breaking of the milk pot in accordance with the Sri Lankan traditions by CDPLC Project Manager of the series of 10 vessels S.M.S.B. Serasinghe took place yesterday, while the ceremonial breaking of the Champagne bottle in accordance with western traditions was done by Godmother of the vessel Dileesh Rosemary De Silva.

As this vessel and her nine sister ships sail through European waters, it will stand as a proud symbol of the strength and capability of Sri Lanka’s shipbuilding industry, as well as the exceptional skill and craftsmanship of the Sri Lankan workforce.

This project began back in March 2020 with a goal of building a total of 10 ships. While several years were marked by unprecedented global disruptions, a pandemic, an economic bankruptcy, regional wars, supply chain disruptions, logistical uncertainties, and untold hardships, CDPLC maintained resilience in meeting its contractual obligations.

With the delivery of this 10th vessel, CDPLC has successfully fulfilled its full commitment to the Norwegian Owner, Misje EcoBulk AS.

The 89.95m DNV-classed Eco Bulker was conceptualised by Wartsila Ship Design Norway, with detailed design work carried out by CDPLC’s skilled in-house design team. In line with the latest trends in sustainable shipping, the vessel is equipped with an advanced Energy Storage Battery System (ESS) for Electric Hybrid Propulsion, complementing the conventional diesel propulsion system to enhance operational performance and reduce environmental impact.

The successful delivery of ‘Misje Kandy’ reaffirms CDPLC’s reputation as a reliable shipbuilder of high-quality, eco-friendly vessels for discerning global clients.

CDPLC contributes to the national export earnings from the shipbuilding sector with much needed foreign currency to the Sri Lankan economy and plays a leading role in uplifting and driving the maritime development strategy of Sri Lanka.

With a strengthened partnership with Mazagon Docks and a clearly defined strategic direction and growth plan, Colombo Dockyard remains optimistic about the future and firmly committed to steering the xompany towards sustainable growth and long-term value creation for the Sri Lankan economy.