Veteran Indian actor Nana Patekar dies at 75 after cardiac arrest

Economic Times -Veteran actor Vishwanath Patekar, also known as Nana Patekar, was found dead at the age of 75 after suffering a cardiac arrest. He was found unconscious in his Goa residence.

Despite 45 minutes of continuous CPR, he could not be revived. A medico-legal case (MLC) has been registered, and a post-mortem will be conducted, said Dr. Shekhar Salkar, Chief of Oncology Department, Manipal Hospital, according to ANI report.

Patekar was widely regarded as one of the best actors in the world of Indian cinema. He was the recipient of three National Film Awards, four Filmfare Awards, two Maharashtra State Film Awards and Filmfare Awards Marathi for his acting performances. He was also awarded the Padma Shri in 2013 for his contribution to cinema and the arts.

Born into a Marathi family in Murud-Janjira in Maharashtra’s Raigad district, the actor made his debut in Bollywood with the 1978 drama Gaman. From there he subsequently appeared in several Hindi and Marathi films.

After starring in the Academy Award-nominated Salaam Bombay in 1988, the veteran actor won the National Film Award for Best Supporting Actor and the Filmfare Award for Best Supporting Actor for his performance in the 1989 crime drama Parinda.

He was also a part of Housefull 5, which starred Akshay Kumar, Abhishek Bachchan, Riteish Deshmukh and others. He appeared as a police officer in Vishal Bhardwaj's O'Romeo, starring Shahid Kapoor and Triptii Dimri. In addition, he had a cameo appearance in Subedar, which stars Anil Kapoor and Radhika Madan.

Nana Patekar was also associated with the Territorial Army. He joined as a captain in 1988 and then underwent three years of military training while preparing for Prahaar: The Final Attack which was his directorial debut. There he worked with then Lieutenant Colonel V K Singh, who also appeared in the film.

His association with the armed forces was not just limited to his film preparation. During the 1999 Kargil War, he served with the Maratha Light Infantry as a major, and later retired from the Territorial Army in 2013 as a lieutenant colonel.

Nana was one of those few superstars who loved to cook his own food and was also knew how to treat his friends to special platters.

His son is also an actor, however Nana Patekar refused to use his stardom to offer his son any help to establish himself in the industry. He was a strong beliver of hard work reaps success, and believed his son should struggle and hard work to secure his place in the industry. He was of the opinion that Malhar should find his way on his own and become a self-made star.

Beyond the world of cinema, Nana Patekar was also a farmer. He reportedly cultivated wheat, rice, etc and sold the produce and donated the money to the needy farmers. He helped the widows of the farmers who had committed suicide by gifting them sewing machines. He helped almost 62 families by giving Rs 15,000 to each in Latur.