Detention and punishment: When the line blurs

The Court of Appeal (CA) has granted bail to a man held on remand for about 15 years under the Prevention of Terrorism Act (PTA). The CA overturned a Colombo High Court order refusing bail to the accused. Stressing that protracted pre-trial detention should not amount to punishment before conviction, and the presumption of innocence remains a cornerstone of criminal justice, the court ruled that there was an exceptional circumstance warranting the accused’s release on bail in keeping with an amendment introduced to the PTA in 2022. However, this amendment has not effectively diluted the draconian character of the PTA to make it rights-compliant; its sweeping powers leave room for abuse. A country needs anti-terror laws to ensure national security and public safety, but they must necessarily conform to international human rights standards and best practices.

It is sad but true that successive governments, bent on suppressing democratic dissent, have manipulated the legal system to ‘punish’ their political opponents by having them remanded or detained for extended periods. They unashamedly invoke the PTA, the Offences against Public Property Act, etc., for this purpose. One can understand why dangerous criminals who pose a threat to public safety are detained for extended periods, but it defies comprehension why others, especially political activists, should be detained or held on remand indefinitely purportedly until the conclusion of investigations. The practice of the police arresting suspects even before investigations into complaints get underway in earnest to ascertain evidence, and having them remanded or detained for long periods, has severely eroded public confidence in the legal system. It must be discontinued forthwith.

In this country, detention is tantamount to punishment for all intents and purposes. Imagine being kept in an overcrowded, squalid prison, where sanitary facilities are scarce and inmates cannot sleep for want of space. Some remand prisoners are housed with convicts. They live in eternal fear of being assaulted or even killed. All 21 inmates killed during the recent riots at the Negombo Prison, which accommodated remand prisoners and convicts, were suspects, as we reported, quoting prison officers, last Wednesday (15). The majority of the injured inmates were also suspects. This alone is proof of the vulnerability of remand prisoners.

There is no gainsaying that Sri Lanka’s prison system is badly in need of a radical shake-up, which remains pie in the sky despite promises made by successive governments to introduce comprehensive prison reforms. The need for much more space and better facilities for the current prison population cannot be overstated. There are more than 41,000 prisoners at present although the prison system has a capacity to hold only 10,000 to 11,000 inmates, according to the government. The Negombo Prison, which was designed to accommodate about 650 prisoners, was holding around 2,400 inmates at the time of the recent riots. However, the physical development of prisons alone will not help evolve a lasting solution to the ever-worsening issue of overcrowding. It is imperative to formulate a comprehensive strategy to overcome the problem and adopt the modern methods already used by other countries.

One may recall that various alternative measures have been proposed, over the past so many years, to ease prison overcrowding due to pre-trial remand or detention. They include expanding bail, introducing electronic monitoring for those who pose no serious risks to the public. They are already used internationally, and Sri Lanka can adopt them easily by introducing necessary legal amendments.

What one gathers from the various views expressed by experts during the previous debates on prison reforms is that well-designed community sanctions can reduce reoffending more effectively than short jail terms. They make sense in that they help not only reduce prison overcrowding and escalating costs but also prevent those convicted for minor offences from networking with criminals in prisons and graduating to serious crimes.

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.