A welcome judgement

Justice has caught up with those who killed SLPP MP Amarakeerthi Athukorale and his security officer. The Gampaha High Court has sentenced 12 convicts to death for the double murder they committed during the 2022 uprising, popularly known as Aragalaya. This judgement has evoked the dreadful memories of the crimes committed in the name of a people’s protest movement about four years ago.

Aragalaya began as an outpouring of public resentment fuelled by the 2022 economic crisis and the resultant shortages of essentials. It developed into what may be described as a carnival of protests at Galle Face, where a motley crowd of activists championing various causes gathered under the ‘Gota Go Home’ banner. It was subsequently hijacked by some ultra-radical political forces with sinister agendas following an SLPP goon attack on the Galle Face protesters in May 2022. Retaliatory attacks carried out by organised groups among protesters turned Aragalaya into a firenado of violence that swept through many parts of the country. It was during that violent phase of  Aragalaya that mobs killed MP Athukorale and his security officer and torched scores of houses belonging to SLPP politicians and their cronies. All SLPP MPs would have suffered the same fate as Athukorale if they had not gone into hiding. The destructive forces responsible for committing crimes in the name of Aragalaya must be brought to justice.

The genuine Aragalaya activists who acted as a pressure group, calling for an end to the Rajapaksa rule, wanted to call off their protest campaign following the resignation of President Gotabaya Rajapaksa; their goal was to see the back of Gotabaya as evident from the catchy hashtag, “GotaGoHome”. But some opportunistic political forces, particularly the JVP, sought to use  Aragalaya to capture Parliament. Minister K. D. Lalkantha himself has admitted that the JVP strove to lead the Aragalaya activists to Parliament, but without success. JVP leaders are seen in social media videos urging the people to rush to Colombo and march on Parliament and deliver a  coup de grace to a teetering system. If the military had not made a decisive intervention at the eleventh hour, using force, aggressive mobs that surged forward menacingly, pulling down barricades, would have captured Parliament and perhaps set it on fire, plunging the country into anarchy. One may recall that a grenade attack on a UNP parliamentary group meeting chaired by President J. R. Jayewardene, with Prime Minister R. Premadasa seated next to him in 1987 almost made the country descend into anarchy. That bomb attack, which left a minister and a public official dead and 16 others injured, was blamed on the JVP.

A former senior Indian police officer discusses grey-zone warfare in an article we have reproduced today from The Statesman, an  Asia News Network member. This doctrine of hybrid conflict has gained currency in diplomatic, defence and intelligence circles the world over. What we witnessed during the final phase of Aragalaya (2022) can be dubbed ‘grey-zone terrorism’. Arson attacks on the houses of prominent SLPP politicians and others were well organised; they could not have been carried out by flash mobs consisting of non-violent protesters. Unfortunately, those crimes have not been probed properly. The then SLPP-UNP government was wary of investigating those serious transgressions; instead, it generously awarded compensation to the victims of arson attacks far in excess of their losses. The incumbent administration has rightly instituted legal action against some of the culprits who helped themselves to public funds by playing the victim card and inflating estimates, but most of the arsonists and the masterminds behind the arson attacks have got off scot-free. They must be traced and made to face the full force of the law.

The welcome judgement in the Athukorale murder case offers a lesson that should not go unlearnt. Those who join mobs and commit crimes must remember that they run the risk of being tried and thrown behind bars. On seeing the instigators of violence during Aragalaya savouring power and going places, the killers of Athukorale and his body guard must be ruing the day they committed that crime.

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.