Sajitha Withanage wins ‘Soorya Overall Youth Top 40 Leader of the Year Award’ 2024

Sajitha Withanage winning the ‘Soorya Overall Top 40 Youth Leader of the Year’

The Soorya team with the nine provincial winners and Dr. Sulochana Segera

Sun Match Company’s flagship brand Soorya, ignited the 2024 edition of the Top 40 Youth Awards to identify and reward the best performing youth talent of Sri Lanka in partnership with WIM ( Women in Management) and Youth Council of Sri Lanka at Shangri-la Hotel with the Chief Guest being the State Minister of Defence Premitha Bandara Tennakoon in the presence of the Brand Ambassador for Soorya Yasodha Wimaladharma

At the iconic event for youngsters where the cream of youth talent was present, Sun Match Company Director Gowri Rajan commented: “The event celebrates the exceptional achievements and innovations of the inspiring youth talent of Sri Lanka. We at Sun Match are proud be a partner to this event as my father TRR Rajan during his youthful days innovated the first wax coated safety match of Sri Lanka and today Soorya is a trusted brand in every home in Sri Lanka.” “Since the inception of this awards five years back, we as the trusted household brand Soorya- Sri Lanka’s 1st Wax coated safety matches, has proudly supported the nurturing of the next generation of leaders and innovators in Sri Lanka together with WIM. This is our commitment to Sri Lanka. The youth is our future,” added Rajan who is also appointed by Rotary Global as a Regional Foundation coordinator for part of India, covering entire Tamil Nadu , Kerela , Sri Lanka and Maldives. The 2024 Top 40 Youth Awards mark the fifth edition of the New Generation Asia Awards, celebrating young individuals for their achievements, leadership, and dedication in various fields. These awards aim to recognise and reward young leaders and innovators who have made significant contributions to their communities and industries.

Sajitha Withanage won the ‘Soorya Overall Top 40 Youth Leader of the Year’ award for achieving 3 A’s in his Advanced Level Bio Science exams and scoring 100 runs as the Cricket Captain of Nalanda College, Colombo, in the Annada-Nalanda big match. This year’s regional winners of the Top 40 Youth Awards 2024 were Kanishta Michael from the Central Province, Jayanthan Amalanathan from the Eastern Province, Mininuwan Bandara from the North Central Province, Lilan Udayanga from the North Western Province, Rachika Anjana from the Sabaragamuwa Province, Bhagya Liyanage (The Rustic Kitchen and Tranquil Village) from the Southern Province, Chamodi Prabodha from the Uva Province, and Randil Perera from the Western Province.

With this partnership Soorya the trusted brand of a Sri Lankan mother, are now keen to support a child’s growth in their future. “We want Soorya brand to advocate and empower youth for the country’s development. By showcasing our support for the next generation of leaders, innovators, and changemakers, we aim to strengthen our reputation as a champion of positive societal impact. A key objective of the awards is to increase visibility for both the event and our brand through a dynamic media strategy and engaging social media efforts,” voiced Rajan and congratulated the Founder Dr. Sulochana Segera and the members of WIM that has championed this cause not only for Sri Lanka but Asia.

Through this event, Soorya reaffirms its commitment to empowering youth, fostering innovation, and supporting the future leaders of tomorrow.