Mujibur warns against Govt. tactics to postpone polls

Raises concern over discussions to postpone elections and change country’s constitution

Calls for unity to oppose attempts to manipulate electoral process and protect democratic rights

Mujibur Rahman issued a warning yesterday to both political parties and the public in Sri Lanka to stay alert for potential Government tactics aimed at postponing elections.

During a press conference in Colombo, Rahman urged all groups to unite in order to safeguard the people’s democratic rights and their right to vote.

The MP accused President Ranil Wickremesinghe of collaborating with a corrupt group and emphasised that the SJB has no intention of working with them.

“President Wickremesinghe’s agenda is inconsistent with that of the SJB,” he said. “The SJB has no desire to engage in discussions with those who violated the constitution, attempted to prevent elections, and betrayed the people’s struggle,” he noted.

Rahman said that while the Election Commission of Sri Lanka (ECSL) is preparing for the polls, representatives of the President are advocating for a two-year postponement of the elections. “It also appears they are discussing changes to the constitution,” he noted. According to the SJB stalwart, these actions indicate that the United National Party (UNP), led by Wickremesinghe, is not ready to face elections.

“They are attempting to find loopholes in the constitution to delay elections and are expressing these sentiments on media platforms,” he said.

Rahman emphasised that as a successor President, Wickremesinghe cannot extend his tenure, and doing so would be unconstitutional.

“People’s Sovereignty has been distorted by the resignations of Gotabhaya Rajapaksa and Mahinda Rajapaksa,” Rahman stated. “A presidential election should be held to correct this. The distortion of people’s Sovereignty cannot continue. The UNP General Secretary and the President are attempting to perpetuate this distortion, but that cannot be allowed,” he said.

“No excuses can be made to extend the term of the succeeding President, Ranil Wickremesinghe,” Rahman added. “Any attempts to extend his term are against the constitution and oppose the popular opinion of the country.”

“Regardless of the Government’s preferences, the people of the country are eagerly awaiting an election,” Rahman stated. “They are ready to use the election to voice their opposition and discontent with the Government. No justification can be made to extend the term of the succeeding President, Ranil Wickremesinghe. Any efforts to prolong his tenure are unconstitutional and go against the will of the people.” the MP noted.

Rahman pointed out that the SLPP members are divided in their opinions and their organisational strength to contest an election is weak. He said this has led them to seek ways to postpone the election. He emphasised that political parties and the public need to remain vigilant about these tactics. “Everyone in the country should stand against this. We must come together and rally against efforts to shrink the electoral map. Additionally, all groups should unite to protect the country’s democratic rights and the people’s voting rights,” he urged.