Wickremesinghe will win no more than 2.5 mn votes at presidential poll: SJB

ECONOMYNEXT — Sri Lanka President Ranil Wickremesinghe will secure no more than 2.5 million votes if he contests the upcoming presidential elections, main opposition Samagi Jana Balawegaya (SJB) MP Ashok Abeysinghe said.

Speaking to reporters, Abeysinghe predicted that, no sooner the presidential election is called, former United National Party (UNP) MPs who lost their seats at the 2020 parliamentary elections will join the SJB en masse.

“This is guaranteed. But no one from our party will leave to a party on the decline,” he said, referring to comments made by UNP general secretary Palith Range Bandara and others that crossovers from the SJB are on the horizon.

“I predict that, if Mr Wickremesinghe contests, he won’t get more than 2.5 million votes. That is why there is talk of a UNP-SLPP alliance these days,” said Abeysinghe.

“The elephant has already allied with the pohottuwa and become president. Everyone knows what will happen if the SLPP doesn’t field its own candidate at the next election and decide to support Mr Wickremesinghe,” he added.

The MP said that voters are unlikely to support an alliance of two parties that have accused each other of robbery.

With just months to go to Sri Lanka’s presidential polls, President Wickremesinghe’s UNP has extended an open invitation to four prominent members of the SJB to return to the grand old party.

Earlier this week, general secretary Range Bandara SJB MPs Thalatha Athukorale, Kabeer Hashim, Harsha de Silva, and Eran Wickramaratne to join the UNP, the latter three of whom make up the SJB’s economic council and largely share Wickremesinghe’s liberal, social market outlook.

Bandara claimed the SJB, which broke off from the UNP in the run-up to the 2020 parliamentary elections, is now controlled by a faction of the ruling Sri Lanka Podujana Peramuna (SLPP). He implied that the SJB leader Sajith Premadasa has been ignoring the four MPs the UNP is now trying to woo to its side. (Colombo/Apr19/2024)