Sri Lanka – Korea Business Council holds 29th Annual General Meeting

Seated (from left): Yashodha Fernando (The Ceylon Chamber of Commerce), SLKBC Vice President Shamil Mendis, Korean Ambassador Miyon Lee, SLKBC President Asitha Martis, K. Kunendran (Abans)

Standing (from left): SLKBC Immediate Past President Priyantha Mendis, Vidura Palihakkara (Senok Trade Combine), SLKBC Vice President Rohitha Mendis, Korean Embassy Deputy Head of Mission Jung Sohngyee, SLKBC Treasurer Patali Karunarathne, Korean Resident Association President Byun Sung Chul, Mahesh Pasqual (Isuru Engineering), Gayan Maddumarachchi (MAC Holdings), and Sylvester Jayasundera (Transmarine)

The Sri Lanka – Korea Business Council of The Ceylon Chamber of Commerce (SLKBC) recently held its 29th Annual General Meeting at The Ceylon Chamber of Commerce, with Ambassador of the Republic of Korea to Sri Lanka Miyon Lee participating in the occasion as Chief Guest.

In her address, the Ambassador commended SLKBC’s efforts in organising events that foster a growing partnership between the business communities of Korea and Sri Lanka.

Ambassador Lee highlighted the progress being made in strengthening ties and emphasised Korea’s pivotal role in supporting Sri Lanka’s economic recovery through Sri Lankan worker employment opportunities and their remittance contributions, development assistance, and collaborative

The Ambassador also underscored the importance of creating a cohesive, investment-friendly environment to drive mutual prosperity and unity in the region.

Asitha Martis from Aitken Spence Shipping Ltd., was re-elected as the President of the Council. He reaffirmed the Council’s commitment to promoting trade, tourism, and services between Sri Lanka and Korea.

He enumerated the activities of the Council such as welcoming a delegation from Busan, Korea, in collaboration with the Korea Trade-Investment Promotion Agency (KOTRA). This meeting resulted in an exchange of ideas, created a foundation for collaborative projects and stronger ties between Busan and Korea. Furthermore, the SLKBC organised a session on Korea’s Current Economy, Business Environment, and Opportunities for joint collaboration. Further a networking evening was conducted for members also attended by Diplomats and Government Officials, another event was one conducted in collaboration with the Council for Start-Ups navigating  Korean market segments and opportunities for Sri Lankan businesses, the Council also hosted a panel discussion titled “Sri Lanka’s Future-Forecast, Scenarios, and Challenges” featuring leading economists and attended by over 170 participants, and an event was organised to visit Port City Colombo, where members observed the potential for initiating projects and to present them to Korean companies.

Martis therefore noted the significant progress made over the past year through key events and initiatives that have advanced SLKBC’s objectives.

President: Asitha Martis – Aitken Spence Shipping, Vice Presidents: Shamil Mendis – Spear International Ltd., and Rohitha Mendis – Prudential Shipping Ltd., Treasurer: Patali Karunarathne – Centrum Marine Consultancy Ltd. , Immediate Past President: Priyantha Mendis, Honorary Members: Prof. Lakshman Watawala and Mahen Kariyawasan, Committee Members: Representatives from Isuru Engineering Ltd., MAC Holdings Ltd., Prudential Shipping Lines Ltd., Senok Trade Combine Ltd., Transmarine Ltd., and Abans PLC.