Unit Trust industry remains stable in February

The unit trust industry of Sri Lanka reported assets under management (AUM) of Rs. 609 Bn, up 4.0% year-over-year and largely unchanged compared to the previous month. These assets are currently managed across 85 funds by 16 management companies.

AUM was supported by flows to equity-related funds, which doubled year-over-year to Rs. 68 Bn. Fixed income funds, on the other hand, declined by 4.4% year-over-year. In addition, since 2025, there has been a gradual shift from shorter-term instruments towards more medium to longer-term investment options, with inflows into open-ended income funds, open-ended equity index/sector funds, and open-ended growth funds (equity), alongside a decline in flows to money market funds.

During the month, the industry added 2,623 new unit holders, up 69.8% year-over-year, bringing the total number of unit trust investors to 149,573, which represents a 26.4% increase year-over-year.

Commenting on the February industry results, newly elected President of the Unit Trust Association of Sri Lanka (UTASL) and Director/CEO of Senfin Asset Management, Jeevan Sukumaran, stated: “The industry’s performance as at end-February 2026 reflects a degree of consistency, with continued activity in equity-related funds. We are also observing a gradual shift towards more balanced investment allocations across fund categories.”

He further noted: “As we move forward, our priority will be to build on this momentum by enhancing investor awareness, broadening access to unit trust products, and working closely with regulators and market participants to strengthen further the industry’s depth, resilience and long-term relevance within Sri Lanka’s financial landscape. In a dynamic market environment, maintaining a disciplined, long-term approach whilst reinforcing the resilience of the unit trust structure, with its focus on diversification and professional fund management, will remain key priorities for the industry.”

Import price shocks of the Hormuz Crisis 2026: How will this affect Sri Lanka?

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.