Switzerland’s GTEX2 phase II to boost Sri Lanka apparel SMEs

ECONOMYNEXT – Sri Lanka has been included in the Swiss government-funded GTEX2 programme for 2024-2027, which seeks to improve the capabilities of the local apparel sector and increase its presence in the global market.

Switzerland’s State Secretariat for Economic Affairs (SECO), the Swedish International Development Cooperation Agency (SIDCA), and the International Trade Center (ITC) fund and provide technical assistance in the second phase of its Global program on Textile and Clothing (GTEX2).

The five-year program will support textile and clothing industry SMEs “to improve their operational capacities, including social norms and environmental sustainability, add value to existing products and services and expand exports to traditional and new markets,” the Sri Lanka Export Development Board said.

The first phase, GTEX1, was carried out in Jordan, Egypt, Morocco, Tunisia, Kyryzstan and Tajikistan. The second phase will be carried out in Egypt, Morocco, Tunisia, Jordan and Sri Lanka.

The EDB and the Joint Apparel Association Forum Sri Lanka (JAAF) will collaborate with the Swiss Confederation in implementation of the programme in the island.

A National Project Coordinator (NPC) has been recruited for Sri Lanka to implement the project activities.

“The overall goal of GTEX is to contribute to economic growth and poverty reduction through sustainable trade and decent job creation along the Textile & Clothing value chain.”

The main beneficiaries of the programme are 20-25 SMEs and 3-5 fashion designers in the textile and clothing sector, business support organizations (BSOs) serving the sector, academia and related training institutions.

The programme will increase export competitiveness of SMEs, improve their operational capacities including on social norms and environmental sustainability, create employment and income, add value to existing products and services and expand exports into traditional and new markets, the EDB said.

“Government agencies also will indirectly benefit as improved regulations on environmental sustainability and trade will improve collaboration with the private sector.”

The textile and apparel industry is the largest export sector in Sri Lanka with export revenue of 4.5 billion dollars in 2023, or 42 percent of total merchandise exports. Main export markets are USA, UK and EU. The industry employs a large number of women. (Colombo/Jul4/2024)