Hidden gem in Los Angeles

Patrick Rutnam, is a Sri Lankan-American actor, born in Los Angeles, in the USA. His film debut was in the action-thriller ‘A Common Man’, co-starring with Ben Kingsley. He has also co-starred in the HBO Series ‘Ballers’ with Dwayne ‘The Rock’ Johnson.

Dirk Tissera, Founder, Publisher and Editor-in-Chief of The ANCHORMAN, Canada, had a chat with Patrick Rutnam, and this is how it all went…

*  GIVE US A SMALL BACKGROUND OF YOUR LIFE, EDUCATION, SCHOOL, MUSIC, AND ACTING:

I was born and raised in Los Angeles, CA. Specifically the San Fernando Valley, in North Hollywood. I went to High School at an All-Boys Catholic School, called Crespi Carmelite High School, in Encino, where I met some of my best friends at that Catholic institution. I then went on to further studies at New York University, Tisch School of the Arts, earning a Bachelor of Fine Arts, and studying Drama within the Atlantic Theatre Company. I was exposed to acting through my father’s (George Rutnam) love of the movies and music. We watched a lot of westerns and classic cinema growing up, and his influences blended into the subconscious of my brother and me. The music that ran through our household were those of the 60s/70s, lots of Elvis, the Beatles, Cat Steven, Billy Joel, CCR, Cream, and Sly and The Family Stone, to name a few.

*  HOW AND WHEN DID YOU GET INTO THE MUSIC AND ACTING SCENE?

When I was kid, we would take trips to Universal City Walk to see movies. And on one occasion, I really wanted my parents to take me to see ‘Toy Story’ when it first hit theaters. I was adamant about seeing that film. All my friends at school were talking about it. It was the only thing that mattered to me at that time. I remember my father deciding against ‘Toy Stor’ and buying tickets for ‘Goldeneye.’ I was extremely disappointed and threw a tantrum, crying, etc., the sort of tantrum that would cause kids to think that life is over. I went into the screening of ‘Goldeneye’ as an unhappy camper, fresh tears still pouring out of my eyes. Then walks out Pierce Brosnan, in the opening sequence of ‘Goldeneye.’ My eyes dried up faster than Bond could pull the trigger. Something changed in me, and I knew my life would never be the same. I wanted to be Pierce Brosnan. I even changed my hairstyle to copy him. At times, when I’m feeling particularly delusional, I still think I look like Pierce Brosnan. I knew from then on, I wanted to play. And that spark has sat with me throughout elementary school plays, high school Shakespeare, NYU training, Off-Off Broadway NY theatre, film and TV Production…and, to date, where I sit here reflecting on where I’ve been and what lies ahead.

*  IN THE MOVIE ‘A COMMON MAN’ WHAT WAS YOUR EXPERIENCE LIKE TO ACT NEXT TO BEN KINGSLEY?

Ben Kingsley is a consummate professional. It was amazing to watch him take ownership of a role and bring it to life. He would wake up in the wee hours of the morning while shooting and live every step of his life in support of the work. It was truly inspiring to see such work ethic. And what we see on screen reflects that. I really took notice when a particular line of action didn’t feel natural to him. He would bring attention to it and find a way to grab the truth of the moment.

*  ALSO IN THE SERIES ‘HIDDEN POCKETS,’ HOW DID YOU COME UP WITH THE TITLE? AND WHOSE IDEA WAS IT? WHEN DO YOU PLAN ON COMPLETING THIS SERIES?

‘Hidden Pockets’ came about upon the passing of Anthony Bourdain (American celebrity chef, author, and travel documentarian). I was deeply saddened by such a raw remarkable soul losing his voice in this world. And around the time of his passing, I was taking multiple trips to Sri Lanka, seeing things most people never thought existed. It was then that I realized we should capture one of those trips and document the discovery of parts of the world unseen to the outside eye. Even local Sri Lankans were shocked at the hidden spots and peoples we would find on these visits. I took my love and admiration for Anthony Bourdain’s style and combined it with my love of discovery. A “Pocket” is defined as a place within a bag or garment that can safely store valuables. Well, the places and peoples we discovered on our journey were truly valuable, not just to Sri Lanka, but to humanity. And they were often “Hidden” out of plain sight. Thus, the name ‘Hidden Pockets.’ There’s been renewed interest in airing the pilot episode in Sri Lanka, and as a part of Airline Entertainment Content. There was interest by a development creative at CNN as well. I’m open to taking ‘Hidden Pockets’ in the direction where it seems to find the most momentum.

*  WHEN DID YOU START YOUR FREIGHT-FORWARDING JOB WITH YOUR DAD’S BUSINESS?

My brother and I often joke that Master Forwarding is my Dad’s first child. He started in in 1980 with a focus on white glove logistics support, and even though it has had its ups and downs, like any business, it continues to run strong to this day, because of its DNA. I grew up in this industry, because he would always take us to work when he needed to attend to something. I fondly remember eating lots of Jack-in-the-Box Tacos and watching him treat every client and shipment with the utmost care. He would tell me, “I may not be a doctor, but I treat every ORDER like a patient. It’s my job to make sure each ORDER is taken care of, no matter the challenge, like a DOCTOR who takes care of his patients.” I grew up filing files away at the office and continue to support the family business in many ways, most notably in making sure we conduct ourselves with the new tools available in technology. It’s a fine line to make sure we use technology to support our service-oriented workflow.

I love music, film, and all forms of artistic expression. I also love reading Non-Fiction. Right now, I’m reading Al Pacino’s memoir, ‘Sonny Boy’.

*  WHAT KIND OF INFLUENCE HAS YOUR DAD AND MUM HAD ON YOUR LIFE ?

I owe my personality and emotionality to both my parents. My mother was Miss Sri Lanka in 1981, and I’m so proud of her humble and modest nature. I’ve never met anyone else with such a high moral resolve, and I still marvel at her strength. It’s hard to put into words the effect that my father has had on my life. He’s been that supportive rock, and continues to believe in me, at times when I don’t believe in myself. To put his influence into words would not do him justice.

*  WHAT KIND OF MUSIC DO YOU LIKE AND WHAT INSTRUMENTS DO YOU PLAY, BESIDES GUITAR?

I really love all types of music, but my favourites tend to be acoustic singer/songwriter tunes. Cat Stevens, Neil Young, Jack Johnson, Dave Matthews, Billy Joel, Young the Giant, Michael Kiwanuka come to mind right now. But the playlist is ever-changing. I’m currently digging this indie rock group centered on two female vocalists, called ‘Lucius’. They’ve got a special sound that really speaks to my energy.

*  ARE YOU DATING ANYONE NOW AND WHEN DO YOU PLAN TO SETTLE DOWN AND START A FAMILY?

Not dating anyone at present. I’ve honestly been focused on my career more than ever, but I’m certainly open to someone. I’ve been sort of a late bloomer as it comes to dating, so it took some time for me to figure out what I want. I’m a searcher, and I know that special someone is out there. Once that is sorted out, I would be open to starting a family. In the meantime, I’m okay with being known as the ‘COOL UNCLE’.

*  HOW OFTEN DO YOU VISIT SRI LANKA, AND WHAT DO YOU THINK OF THE COUNTRY AND ITS PEOPLE?

I tend to go once or twice a year, but, definitely, at least once a year, to spend time with my mother and family out there. Sri Lanka has always had the most soulful people in the world. There’s a certain love and care amongst its people that feels pure. Even though Sri Lanka has carried a historical weight of poor governance, nothing can change the character of those that live there. Let’s hope this new direction will create a rising tide, lifting all boats. In terms of cultural output, Sri Lanka has an excellent musical scene, and a film community that is making huge strides. Pretty soon, you’ll see more and more Sri Lankans in the global mainstream.

To express myself, as creatively as possible, as an artist, both in film and music. Hopefully such expressions will lead to success. And hopefully such successes will lead to inspiring others to do the same. Ultimately, I would love to gain enough attention, security, and success as an artist, so that I can build a production company bringing more risk-taking artists and content to the world.

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.