JKH posts strong Q3 EBITDA growth of 68% to Rs.23.76 billion driven by momentum across the portfolio

Summarised below are the key operational and financial highlights of our performance during the quarter under review:

The Group continued to deliver a strong performance, with all businesses reporting improved profitability.

The operationalisation of two of the Group’s largest projects, the City of Dreams Sri Lanka integrated resort and the West Container Terminal (WCT-1) at the Port of Colombo, continued to progress well. The encouraging quarter-on-quarter momentum demonstrates the strong ramp up potential of both projects.

The country faced an unexpected challenge in November with Cyclone Ditwah, which impacted parts of Southeast and South Asia. The cyclone caused loss of lives, affected a significant portion of the population, and resulted in considerable infrastructure damage in certain areas of Sri Lanka. While the operations of the Group were disrupted during the few days of the cyclone, there were no significant operational or financial impact as a direct result of the cyclone and related flooding.

The Group and its staff supported relief efforts through various initiatives, including a substantial contribution of Rs.500 million from John Keells Holdings PLC and its affiliate companies towards the Government’s ‘Rebuilding Sri Lanka’ initiative.

Group earnings before interest, tax, depreciation and amortisation (EBITDA) at Rs.23.76 billion in the third quarter of the financial year 2025/26 is an increase of 68% against Group EBITDA of Rs.14.15 billion recorded in the third quarter of the previous financial year.

Cumulative Group EBITDA for the first nine months of the financial year 2025/26 at Rs.55.10 billion is an increase of 84% against the EBITDA of Rs.29.94 billion recorded in the same period of the financial year 2024/25.

During the quarter under review, the Group recorded fair value gains on investment property amounting to Rs.2.30 billion [2024/25 Q3: Rs.955 million], and net exchange losses of Rs.759 million [2024/25 Q3: gain of Rs.782 million], mainly due to the impact of the deprecation of the Rupee on the foreign currency denominated loan at City of Dreams Sri Lanka.

Profit attributable to equity holders of the parent is Rs.6.48 billion in the quarter under review, which includes fair value gains on investment property and net exchange losses amounting to Rs.1.45 billion. Profit attributable to equity holders of the parent for the corresponding period of the previous financial year was Rs.2.85 billion, which included fair value gains on investment property and net exchange gains amounting to Rs.1.70 billion.

The second interim dividend for FY2026 of Rs. 0.10 per share is aligned with the first interim dividend paid in November 2025. This reflects the expectation that the current momentum of performance will sustain or further improve going forward. The outlay for the second interim dividend is Rs.1.77 billion, which is an increase compared to Rs.881 million in the previous year.

Janashakthi Finance records 35% growth in Net Operating Income and LKR 389 Mn. PBT in Q3 FY26

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.