SLT-MOBITEL crowned ‘Best Corporate Citizen Sustainability Award 2023’

Recognized for its exceptional commitment to sustainable business practices, Sri Lanka Telecom PLC (SLT) secured the esteemed ‘Best Corporate Citizen Sustainability Award 2023’ in the ‘Other’ category at a recent gala event. The award was granted following a rigorous evaluation process, during which SLT competed against 33 leading corporations.

The annual awards are organized by the Ceylon Chamber of Commerce, Sri Lanka’s premier business chamber, to felicitate organizations committed to sustainability across various sectors.

Sustainability has always been a core pillar of SLT-MOBITEL’s corporate strategy. The recognition reaffirms SLT-MOBITEL’s position as a champion of sustainable development in Sri Lanka amidst continuous efforts to minimize its environmental footprint. The award also highlights SLT-MOBITEL’s strength in uplifting communities, ensuring ethical governance, and driving economic progress through innovative products and services while creating long-term value for all stakeholders through responsible business conduct.

The ‘Best Corporate Citizen Sustainability Award’ celebrates organizations that have implemented comprehensive sustainability initiatives spanning Environmental, Social and Governance (ESG) aspects.

The Chamber evaluated companies across stringent criteria, including environmental stewardship, customer and community relations, corporate governance, financial performance, economic contributions, and special sustainable development projects.

Shortlisted companies then underwent rigorous interviews with an elite panel of international and United Nations representatives.

SLT-MOBITEL’s senior leadership team, including Janaka Abeysinghe (Chief Executive Officer); Prabhath Dahanayake ( Chief Marketing Officer); Dr. Chandana Wijayanama ( Chief People Officer), Anuruddha Suriyarachchi (GM – Marketing Services) and several other senior officials attended the glittering awards ceremony.

As Sri Lanka’s leading digital services provider, SLT-MOBITEL will continue to raise the bar for corporate sustainability, paving the way for a more prosperous and environmentally conscious future for the nation.

Sri Lanka Insurance Life strengthens it Bancassurance partnership with Regional Development Bank

Colombo shaping up as a major tourist destination – President Wickremesinghe

SLT-MOBITEL powers historic ‘Battle of the Rocks’ cricket encounter as Platinum Sponsor

SLT-MOBITEL hosts National Celebration of World Seagrass Day 2024 and UN Restoration Flagship Award ceremony

SLT-MOBITEL teams up with BaseKit Platform UK to launch new web builder ‘CubKit’, empowering Sri Lankan SMEs

SLT-MOBITEL together with Sri Lanka Railways introduces e-Ticket and e-Warrant solution

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.