HSBC kicks off ‘Clean Waterways’

HSBC will launch ‘Clean Waterways’ in partnership with the Beira Lake Restoration Task Force that was convened by the Governor of the Western Province to restore Beira Lake. HSBC in partnership with Clean Ocean Force will build and operate two solar powered, zero emission, waterway cleaning boats, which are the first of their kind in Sri Lanka. They will be used extensively in support of restoring the Beira Lake ecosystem and its surrounding environment.

Once a picturesque centerpiece in Colombo, Biera Lake is now suffering from significant pollution. Urbanization and lack of effective waste management practices have led to large volumes of plastic and floating organic debris, untreated sewage and industrial effluents contaminating the water. Resultant algal blooms, unchecked hyacinth growth and water stagnation further give the lake a detrimental odour and appearance. The pollution has degraded water quality, harmed aquatic life posing health risks to residents living in proximity by attracting disease-carrying fauna.

The Biera Lake Restoration Task Force was convened by the Governor of the Western Province with the purpose of delivering cleaner waterways in the urban environment. It is vital to educate and support change for communities that reside near the Beira Lake. To achieve this, a dedicated community outreach programme will reach over 5000 wider residents through awareness building and education which is anticipated to reduce ‘waste at source’.

Mark Surgenor, Chief Executive Officer, HSBC Sri Lanka stated “With over 130 years presence in Sri Lanka, HSBC understands the importance of Beira Lake to Colombo’s urban environment. Supporting cleaner waterways is a vital step towards restoration of that environment. Through this first ever public-private partnership, multiple stakeholders are coming together to work towards restoring this iconic lake. We have committed to support the Beira Lake Restoration Task force, not just with the much-needed funding, but also bringing best practices through our experience with similar projects in other markets that we operate in. The community outreach programme planned alongside the project is a critical step towards making this impact sustainable. HSBC has always been at the forefront of innovation in Sri Lanka and we look forward to continuing that for our next 130 years here”

Arvind Subramanian: Why hasn’t Sri Lanka’s democracy acted as a hedge against economic chaos?

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.