Thriving corruption and delayed probes

Past several months have seen some former ministers and ex-state officials being remanded and denied bail ‘to prevent interference with evidence-gathering processes and the intimidation of witnesses. Some of the offences they are charged with were allegedly committed years ago during previous governments. It is while in power that transgressors can cover their tracks by suppressing or eliminating evidence and influencing or intimidating witnesses. Those who are facing legal action for corruption must have resorted to such tactics while their parties were in power. The venal state officials accused of having aided and abetted such alleged transgressions for personal gain, too, must have done likewise. It is therefore doubtful whether holding them on remand for extended periods at present serves the intended purpose.

Politicians and officials should be arrested and remanded immediately after their transgressions come to light if interference with evidence and the intimidation of witnesses are to be prevented. If investigations had been launched into numerous corrupt deals exposed during the Mahinda Rajapaksa government, it would have been possible to bring those responsible for them to justice. Most members of that administration have got away with their corrupt deals.

Various international organisations campaigning against corruption, money laundering, etc., particularly Transparency International, the National Anti-Corruption Commission of Australia, and the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, have stressed the importance of swift probes. They have pointed out that investigating corruption immediately after instances thereof come to light is essential for multiple reasons. Early investigations help preserve evidence and deter concealment, which is very common in Sri Lanka. Corrupt politicians are known to hide documents, destroy records or influence witnesses, especially when they are in power. Evidence can be made to disappear making it harder for investigators to get at the truth if investigations are delayed. Equally, prompt investigations are a prerequisite for maintaining public trust in institutions, such as the Commission to Investigate Allegations of Bribery or Corruption, and the rule of law. Protracted delays in conducting investigations invariably create the impression that the system is corrupt, ineffective and biased. Early action increases the chances of successful prosecution and deterrence.

It is against this backdrop that several damning allegations of corruption against the incumbent government should be viewed. The JVP/NPP came to power, promising what it described as ‘a system change’ to eliminate bribery and corruption and other such social evils. But it is apparently emulating its predecessors in handling allegations against its senior members. It vilifies whistle-blowers, denies allegations and delays investigations. Worse, the CID is headed by a prominent member of the Retired Police Collective of the NPP, and its integrity is therefore compromised.

A huge stock of coal imported for power generation has been found to be substandard. The low calorific value of the coal has resulted in low power output per tonne, and engineers have warned that the use of low-quality coal could damage the machinery of the Norochchoalai power plant. Staggering losses the Ceylon Electricity Board has suffered by importing substandard coal are expected to be passed on to the public in the form of tariff hikes. The government is accused of having interfered with the tender process to facilitate the registration of the company which supplied the low-quality coal. What needs to be done immediately is to probe the allegation that the bidding process was delayed to enable the supplier concerned to be registered. A delay in launching an investigation into the alleged coal procurement racket will help the culprits cover their tracks.

A Parliamentary Select Committee (PSC) probe has been launched into the green-channelling of as many as 323 red-flagged freight containers through the Colombo Port in January 2025. The uninspected cargo may have included narcotics and lethal weapons, the Opposition has claimed. It has been alleged that the high-risk containers were released at the behest of a powerful minister. So, one can argue that the government helped cover his tracks before launching a parliamentary probe. Only the naïve will expect a PSC, dominated by the NPP MPs and headed by a minister, to reveal anything that is detrimental to the interests of the NPP government.

Keheliya Rambukwella was arrested over a procurement racket in the Health Ministry while he was a minister in the previous government. True, that beleaguered administration had to throw him to the wolves for want of a better alternative. But the fact remains that his arrest and remand helped protect the evidence-gathering process, among other things. Why no arrests have been made over the release of 323 high-risk containers without Customs inspection, and the procurement of substandard coal, under the ‘clean’ NPP government, is the question.

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.