Prime Lands Residencies’ ‘The Grand Ward Place’ website shines with dual wins at 14th BestWeb.lk 2024 competition

Prime Lands Residencies shines with dual awards at the 14th BestWeb.lk 2024, celebrating excellence in digital innovation

Prime Lands Residencies PLC, has once again demonstrated excellence as a digital innovator clinching two prestigious awards for ‘The Grand Ward Place’ www.thegrand.com.lk website at the 14th BestWeb.lk 2024 Competition, organised by the LK Domain Registry, held recently.

The website of the ultra-luxurious condominium secured the Gold Award for ‘Best Mobile User Experience Corporate Website’ and the Silver Award for ‘Best Corporate Website’ reinforcing the company’s ability to deliver an exceptional online experience for their customers across all platforms.

The accolades were presented to Officials of Prime Lands Residencies PLC at a gala event held on 14 August at the Cinnamon Grand Hotel, where leading digital innovators and visionaries gathered to celebrate technological excellence.

‘The Grand’ website was commended for its outstanding mobile responsiveness, elegant design, and intuitive user interface. The website was also praised for delivering a rich digital experience, featuring virtual property tours, real-time chat support, and effortless navigation, ensuring a smooth and engaging online journey. The digital evolution perfectly aligns with Prime Lands Residencies PLC’s commitment to merging luxury with state-of-the-art technology.

“We are incredibly honoured to receive these awards at BestWeb.lk 2024,” stated Prime Lands Residencies Director Shehana Brahmanage. “The recognition is a testament to our relentless pursuit of excellence in the digital space. Our team’s hard work and dedication have paid off, and these awards further inspire us to continue enhancing the online experiences we provide to our customers.”

Behind this success is the collaborative synergy between the company’s in-house digital marketing and IT teams and trusted web development partner, Aidantz. The partnership has resulted in a digital platform that exceeds the expectations of today’s discerning online consumers. The combined expertise has also been able to craft a user experience that effectively showcases Prime Lands Residencies PLC offerings while setting new standards in the digital real estate landscape.

The dual honours align with Prime Residencies’ priority pillars of technological innovation and customer experience enhancement. It showcases the company’s commitment to leverage technology for convenience, offer seamless interactions, and innovative solutions that enhance customer satisfaction.

The annually ‘BestWeb.lk Competition’ has established itself as Sri Lanka’s leading web contest, showcasing digital innovation and creativity of companies. The judging criteria for BestWeb.lk comprises creativity, graphic design quality, artistry, technological competence, and content excellence. Websites are rigorously assessed by an eminent panel for their aesthetic appeal and user-friendliness ensuring they resonate effectively with online audiences.