Chartered Management Institute (UK) Sri Lanka branch re-appoints Kamaya Perera as President

The Chartered Management Institute (CMI-UK) Sri Lanka branch has announced the re-appointment of Kamaya Perera as its President during its 24th Annual General Meeting held on 12 August 2025.

Perera, a distinguished leader in the management field, assumes this pivotal role as the first female President of the CMI Sri Lanka branch with a steadfast commitment to advancing professional standards and fostering leadership excellence across Sri Lanka.

The Chief Guest at the 24th Annual General Meeting, The British Council Sri Lanka Country Director Orlando Edwards in his address underscored the strong educational and professional ties between CMI and the British Council. In his address he spoke about the similarities in the kind of work that both organisations perform. He also provided an overview of the British Council’s ongoing work in Sri Lanka, including initiatives in education, cultural exchange, and skills development. “We are proud of the work we have done in Sri Lanka over the years, and we remain committed to expanding our reach and impact,” Edwards added.

Speaking at the event, CMI UK Chief Executive Ann Francke congratulated President Kamaya Perera, for her exemplary leadership of the Sri Lankan branch and the engagement of the Sri Lanka Regional Board. “I am particularly pleased to see Sri Lanka’s active contribution to the Asia Pacific Leadership and for sharing their knowledge across their colleagues in the Asia Pacific,” Francke said.

She also recognised President Kamaya Perera’s recent achievement — being honoured with the Global CEO Top Businesswoman Award, a prestigious accolade that celebrates excellence and leadership in professional education.

The new committee members for the Administrative Year 2025/2026 were announced a follows: Kamaya Perera – President (Fellow), Chaminda De Silva – 1st Vice President (Chartered Fellow), Dr. Thesara Jayawardane – 2nd Vice President (Chartered Fellow), Ninesh Amirthiah –Secretary (Fellow), Ravi Jayawardena – Treasurer (Member), Rishantha Mendis –Asst. Secretary (Fellow), Graeme La Brooy – Assistant Treasurer (Fellow), Chaya Ranaweera (Fellow), Farhaz Farouk (Chartered Fellow), Uthpala Ranasinghe (Chartered Member), Tharindu Amarasinghe (Fellow) and Damith Chaminda (Member) are committee members.

Professor Ajantha Dharmasiri (Chartered Companion) would continue as the Immediate Past President.

In her address, Kamaya Perera expressed her profound gratitude for the opportunity to lead the CMI Sri Lanka Branch and outlined her vision for the future. She emphasised the importance of embracing digital transformation, promoting innovation, and upholding ethical standards in management practices. President Kamaya spoke about her theme for the year “From Vision to Victory – Turning Ideas into Impact.”

She said “Our path will be guided by three pillars: Impact – driving meaningful change in workplaces, industries, and communities, innovation – fostering fresh ideas and solutions that prepare us for the future, and integrity – ensuring that every action we take reflects our highest values.”

The CMI Sri Lanka branch looks forward to a productive year ahead under the guidance of Kamaya, dedicated to advancing management excellence and leadership development across Sri Lanka.