US committed to Sri Lanka’s economic development, Biden writes to AKD

ECONOMYNEXT — US President Joe Biden has written to Sri Lanka President Anura Kumar Dissanayake calling for enhanced cooperation between the two countries in promoting economic growth, regional security and democratic governance.

The President’s Media Division (PMD) in Colombo said on Tuesday October 08 that Biden had written to Dissanayake to congratulate him on his recent election victory. The PMD called Biden’s letter a “significant gesture of diplomatic goodwill”.

In a separate statement, the PMD said the US has also committed to providing essential support to strengthen Sri Lanka’s economy. According to the PMD, US Ambassador Julie Chung has said in a meeting on Tuesday that support would be focused on fostering an export-driven economy in the island nation.

The International Monetary Fund (IMF) and the United States Agency for International Development (USAID) are prepared to offer financial support to help enhance the economic prospects of Sri Lanka, the statement quoted Chung as saying.

The US has pledged both financial and technical support for President Dissanayake’s initiatives aimed at preventing fraud and corruption and has also expressed its commitment to assisting efforts for good governance and ensuring the security of Sri Lanka whenever needed, the PMD said.

The US also supports the new president’s programmes focused on developing renewable energy, fostering an export-oriented agricultural industry, and alleviating rural poverty, the statement added, noting that an ongoing initiative to provide lunches for rural schools will be expanded to include urban schools in the future.

The president’s office said Biden’s message recognised the “importance of the peaceful and democratic nature of the election, which reaffirmed the strength of Sri Lanka’s democratic institutions”.

“This election reflects the strength of Sri Lanka’s democratic institutions and the commitment of its citizens to shaping their future through free and fair elections conducted in a peaceful manner, a cornerstone of any democracy,” Biden was quoted as saying.

In his letter, the US president has emphasised the shared values between the two nations, particularly in advancing stability, prosperity, and inclusivity for all Sri Lankan citizens and also expressed optimism about strengthening bilateral ties under President Dissanayake’s leadership, highlighting cooperation in several key areas.

“The United States shares your vision of a more equitable Sri Lanka that is stable, prosperous, and inclusive of all its citizens,” Biden has said, expressing his commitment to working with President Dissanayake to “further enhance cooperation between the two nations, particularly in promoting inclusive economic growth, regional security, and democratic governance”.

“This message marks a new chapter in U.S.-Sri Lanka relations, with both countries poised to collaborate on initiatives that will benefit the region and uphold democratic principles,” the PMD said in its statement. (Colombo/Oct09/2024)