US Ambassador nominee pledges to support marginalized populations, accountability, truth and reconciliation in Sri Lanka

The U.S. President Joe Biden’s nominee for Ambassador to Sri Lanka, Elizabeth K. Horst, says that if confirmed she will support members of marginalized populations, accountability, truth and reconciliation, and transparency and justice in Sri Lanka.

“I will support members of marginalized populations, accountability, truth and reconciliation, and transparency and justice in Sri Lanka,” she said, appearing before the US Senate Foreign Relations Committee on Thursday (May 09).

She also highlighted three main pillars for enhancing the U.S.-Sri Lanka relationship: expanding economic cooperation, bolstering security interests, and deepening ties with Sri Lanka’s diverse population.

Horst, a seasoned diplomat with over 20 years of experience in South Asia, emphasized her commitment to fundamental U.S. principles, including respect for human rights and economic freedom.

In her opening statement, Horst underscored the economic cooperation as a priority, with a focus on strengthening trade relations, fostering private sector-led growth, and promoting innovation and entrepreneurship.

Furthermore, she acknowledged Sri Lanka’s resilience in overcoming challenges such as the civil war that ended in 2009 and the political and economic crises of 2022. She emphasized the United States’ role in providing aid during the 2022 crisis and reiterated continued support for Sri Lanka’s economic recovery.

Security collaboration between the two nations was also emphasized, particularly in addressing transnational crime, enhancing maritime security, and responding to natural disasters in the strategically significant Indian Ocean region.

“If confirmed, I will reiterate our shared commitment to a free and open Indo Pacific region, collaborative maritime security, the rules-based international order, and stability throughout the Indian Ocean”, she added.

The US President’s nominee for U.S. Ambassador to Sri Lanka expressed eagerness to deepen people-to-people ties, including with the Sri Lankan American community, and to support marginalized populations, accountability, truth, and reconciliation in Sri Lanka.

Acknowledging the importance of the embassy team in Colombo, Horst pledged to lead, develop, and empower the interagency team and local staff to advance bilateral relations and benefit the American people, if the appointment is confirmed.

The nominee concluded by expressing her interest to work with Congress to strengthen the U.S.-Sri Lanka relationship.

If the appointment is confirmed, Elizabeth K. Horst will succeed the current U.S. Ambassador to Sri Lanka, Julie Chung, in representing the interests of the United States in the South Asian island nation.