Ranil “a man of our time” says Rajitha at MoU signing

SJB MP Dr. Rajitha Senaratne signs MoU with President Ranil Wickremesinghe to support his candidacy

Says Wickremesinghe’s efforts to rebuild SL moved him to support him

Reveals Sajith Premadasa promised to grant national list slot to his son in return for his support

Stresses he is not willing to contribute to SL’s downfall by persisting with certain political agendas which will disrupt President’s program

Samagi Jana Balawegaya (SJB) MP Dr Rajitha Senaratne signed a Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) with President Ranil Wickremesinghe at the Gangaramaya Temple in Colombo yesterday, committing his support to Wickremesinghe in the upcoming Presidential Election.

Speaking at the event, Senaratne described Wickremesinghe as a “man of our time” who altered Sri Lanka’s trajectory by rescuing it from a dire situation. Senaratne said this moved him to support the President in his candidacy.

He said if Wickremesinghe is defeated, and the recent achievements are lost, people may only realise too late what he accomplished. He said by then, it would be too late for both Wickremesinghe and the country. He said there have been many improvements in the health sector under Wickremesinghe’s rule.

Senaratne said that if politicians persist with their political agendas and disrupt the ongoing program, leading to the country’s downfall, he is not willing to contribute to that sin.

He claimed he has no personal conflict with SJB leader Sajith Premadasa, his wife Jalani Premadasa or other leaders of the party.

Senaratne revealed that Premadasa urged him to remain supportive and not leave the fold, which made him feel deeply emotional. He also claimed that Premadasa promised a national list seat for his son, Chathura Senaratne, in exchange for his continued support. “He assured me that Chathura would be given one of the top three slots,” Senaratne said.

Senaratne said he held several rounds of discussions with Wickremesinghe and the MoU has no conditions which would personally benefit him. He said they were all for the benefit of the country.

Speaking at the event, President Ranil Wickremesinghe said that for Sri Lanka to move forward, it is essential not only to revive the economy but also to reform the political framework. He mentioned that, like himself, Senaratne has radical ideas for transforming society, which is why he extended an invitation for Senaratne to join him in this effort.

The MoU was signed at the Gangaramaya Seema Malakaya amidst the chanting of pirith by the Maha Sangha.