Tishan Subasinghe takes the reins as 28th President of CA Sri Lanka

The Institute of Chartered Accountants of Sri Lanka (CA Sri Lanka) yesterday ushered in a new era of leadership with the formal induction of Tishan Subasinghe as its 28th President.

The gala ceremony, held on 20 January 2026 at the Shangri-La Hotel, Colombo, was a distinguished celebration of excellence and vision, uniting the nation’s leading figures from the profession, business, and judiciary in a spirit of connectedness and shared purpose.

The outgoing President, Heshana Kuruppu, performed the ceremonial handover of office to Subasinghe. The event was graced by International Federation of Accountants (IFAC) President Jean Bouquot, who attended as the Chief Guest, and the Justice of the Supreme Court of Sri Lanka Justice Yasantha Kodagoda as the Guest of Honour.

Subasinghe’s election to this office marks the pinnacle of a distinguished and multifaceted career spanning over 28 years, underpinned by a profound, long-standing commitment to CA Sri Lanka dating back to his student days. A Fellow Member of the Institute and a Council Member since 2013, he most recently served as its Vice President during the 2024-2025 term.

His professional eminence is built upon a formidable academic and professional foundation. He is also an Attorney-at-Law and a life member of the Bar Association and holds an MBA in Finance from the University of Colombo, where he was awarded a Subject Gold Medal, and is a Certified Information Systems Auditor (CISA-USA). He is a founder member of the Institute of Certified Management Accountants of Sri Lanka and a member of the UK’s Association of Chartered Certified Accountants (ACCA).

Subasinghe is the Managing Director of Moore Consulting Ltd., and Joint Managing Partner of Moore Aiyar, bringing extensive leadership experience from prior roles including leading Audit and Assurance at BDO Partners. His career reflects a significant global perspective, honed through international assignments with PricewaterhouseCoopers (PwC) in New York, Philadelphia, and Botswana.

In his inaugural address, Subasinghe outlined his vision, explaining that the new Council’s work under his leadership would be guided by the theme ‘CONNECT’.

“Allow me to explain the underlying thought process,” he stated. “Having laid the platform for a future-ready profession, we will now actively connect our membership with all key stakeholders to place CA Sri Lanka in the highest esteem. While we are already engaged with many, we intend to further strengthen these relationships and build new connections. This will empower and position our members, ensuring the profession is represented with the utmost distinction.”

He further emphasised that the profession is no longer confined to traditional financial roles. “Chartered Accountants will emerge as strategic business leaders, technology-driven professionals, and ethical communicators. In fact, it is my belief that financial reporting per se will be merely one aspect of a much broader sustainability framework. Accountancy is not a dying profession, but a fast-changing one,” he said.

Subasinghe’s expertise extends to national policy formulation, regulatory governance, and standard-setting with active involvement in key institutions and committees. He is a Board Member of the Sri Lanka Accounting and Auditing Standards Board (SLAASMB) and an ex officio member of the Securities and Exchange Commission. He has also contributed to key national initiatives, having served on the Presidential Commission on the Simplification of Laws and Regulations, as well as the Committee for the Revival of Failed Licensed Finance Companies established by the Central Bank of Sri Lanka. He also served on the Council of the University of Moratuwa for over five years.

Within CA Sri Lanka, Subasinghe’s strategic contributions have been substantial. He has chaired numerous committees and even guided the Examinations Committee through a critical digital transformation, successfully moving examinations online in 2020 to ensure continuity for students during the COVID-19 pandemic. He previously served as Vice President of the Young Chartered Accountants Forum.

Regionally, he has actively elevated Sri Lanka’s standing within the global profession through his roles on the Board and committees of the Confederation of Asian and Pacific Accountants (CAPA) and the South Asian Federation of Accountants (SAFA).

In addition to his professional and institutional roles, Subasinghe serves as an Independent Non-Executive Director on several prominent Boards, including for a bank, an insurance company, and several other publicly quoted company sectors.

Anoji de Silva was elected as the new Vice President. A Fellow Member of CA Sri Lanka, De Silva served on the Council from 2020-2025. She is a Senior Partner at Ernst & Young Sri Lanka and Maldives, serving as the Professional Practice Director and the ISQM Leader.

An accomplished audit partner for major local and international groups across multiple sectors, she is also the former Chairperson of the Women’s Chamber of Industry and Commerce (2021–2023) and a member of the Sri Lanka Institute of Directors.