‘Road traffic accidents, a preventable burden’- SLMA Expert Committee

Around 8-9 lives are lost daily due to road accidents (Image courtesy Accident 1st.)

Medical experts identify various reasons ranging from defects in road infrastructure to other causes as reasons for accidents

Helmet Hero programme was launched to address the issue of children travelling in motorbikes sans helmets

Road accidents are known as the biggest man-made disaster and the biggest public health issue

Road traffic accidents are now being described as a man-made disaster. According to the Sri Lanka Medical Association’s (SLMA) expert committee on road accidents, over 2500 fatal accidents were recorded in 2025 resulting in over 2700 deaths. Medical experts have identified various causes ranging from defects in road infrastructure to lack of adequate rest among drivers and ignoring safety practices such as wearing helmets. A majority of children travelling on motorbikes don’t wear helmets and to address this issue the Helmet Hero programme was launched. Spearheaded by Rotary Sri Lanka and Maldives, SLMA expert committee on road traffic accidents and eChannelling, this islandwide mission aims to provide SLS certified helmets for children free-of-charge.

Speaking at a recent discussion, Dr. Ruwan Thushara Matiwalage, Convener and Secretary of SLMA’s Expert Committee on Prevention of Road Traffic Accidents said that around 1849 accidents have been recorded this year. According to him, road traffic accidents have claimed around 15,000-16,000 young lives during the past six years. “The SLMA intervenes in terms of post-crash care. The committee comprises representatives from many stakeholder organisations including Sri Lanka Police, Department of Motor Traffic, Suwaseriya ambulance service, Colombo Municipal Council, Road Development Authority and several other non-governmental organisations,” he said.

He further said that road accidents are known as the biggest man made disaster and the biggest public health issue. In addition, it also carries a financial burden. According to the World Bank report on road safety in Sri Lanka, road traffic crashes and injuries cost an estimated 3-5% of the Gross Domestic Product.

“The minimum is roughly USD 2.5 billion (Rs. 750-800 billion). The IMF loan is USD 2.9 billion. The treasury allocates around Rs. 700 billion from the budget for healthcare. In previous years this allocation was around Rs. 300-400 billion. This includes property damage. The damage to lives is incalculable,” Dr. Matiwalage added.

Citing previous statistics, he said that Sri Lanka has lost around 40,000 people to road traffic accidents after 2009. Another concern is with regards to the age group of the vulnerable population.

Dr. Matiwalage further said that people between 15-45 years of age are more vulnerable (over 65%) to road traffic accidents. “They are the working age population that we are losing. We have low birth rates and without the youth our workforce would be impacted. If they sustain head or spinal injuries they will be disabled for life. This should be treated as a priority. If we can reduce road accidents by 50% then we would be able to reduce annual deaths to around 1500,” he said.

One observation made with regards to road accidents is the lack of helmets. Dr. Manilka Sumanatilleke, President of SLMA said that people sometimes are unable to find helmets for children with appropriate sizes. “Some helmets that are available doesn’t meet the required standards. This is why we initiated the Helmet Hero programme to provide SLS certified helmets for children free-of-charge. We plan to launch this initiative islandwide,” he said.

Dr. Sumanatilleke said that buses also contribute to road accidents. “Some drivers drive for 16 hours at a stretch. But this shift should ideally be divided among two drivers. They don’t have places to take rest. Private bus drivers usually rest inside their bus and this is not a proper way to take rest. So they don’t have a proper mindset to travel on their next turn. Adequate rest is a must for drivers driving long distance buses. Alcohol and drug tests should also be conducted,” he underscored.

He further said that one possible approach to influence behavioral changes is to highlight examples of driver discipline.

Speaking at the discussion, Ishan De Zoysa, Senior Professor in Surgery, Faculty of Medicine at University of Colombo said that around 8-9 lives are lost daily due to road accidents. He said that in 2025 there had been around 2721 deaths. He said that the burden on the healthcare system is doubled as a result of road accidents.

“Some people who sustain injuries would have to be admitted to hospitals. They may have to undergo surgeries. Others will have to be admitted to emergency care units (ECUs). The National hospital has an accident service where most people injured due to road accidents are being admitted to. The state loses a huge amount of money due to treatments done on people who have sustained injuries due to road accidents. The focus now is to prevent these accidents,” he added.

One observation he made during the discussion is the fact that pedestrians who move slowly on the roads are more vulnerable to deaths and severe injuries. He said that it is mandatory for motorcyclists and pillion riders to wear a helmet and this law was enforced during the 1980s. “But we sometimes see adults riding motorcycles without helmets. Many children travel in bikes without helmets. Through the Helmet Hero programme we aim to provide helmets for children as many individuals don’t have the financial means to purchase helmets,” Dr. Zoysa said.

Some individuals who sustain injuries from road accidents would recover faster than others. Dr. Kapila Sooriyarachchi, Communications Specialist at Health Promotion Bureau said that accidents in turn impacts the family unit. “Perhaps it could be the breadwinner who is injured. As a result it would impact their domestic lives, education, career and so on. It only takes a split second for all of this to happen. It could have been as a result of trying to earn more money. We see that buses take more turns to run despite exhaustion. Traffic, infrastructure defects also contribute to accidents. The budget and resources required to treat other patients would have to be allocated to treat those injured by road traffic accidents. We see accidents happening every day, but we should discuss why these accidents are happening,” he said.

Dr. Sooriyarachchi further said that behavioral changes are required to minimise road accidents. “There are communication strategies to influence behavioral changes. Sometimes warnings alone won’t suffice. Not even 5% of people would be impacted. But there are some who would take these messages seriously. Media play a role in bringing about these behavioral changes,” he added.

In his remarks, Chandana L. Aluthgama, former chief executive officer at Sri Lanka Insurance Corporation said that even though the damage to property could be assessed it is unthinkable to give back a life. “If we save around 50% of the budget allocated to treat people injured by road accidents it is a huge saving. In certain countries they have highlighted safety from an individual level. Parents give everything for their children but there’s an issue in terms of giving them helmets in the Sri Lankan context. Perhaps due to rushed lifestyles they may forget basic needs,” he said.

He said it is important to give a positive message to people instead of negative news. “In Scandinavian countries there’s a breaking news alert if an accident takes place. But here, people distort the original news and write their own thoughts. In other countries they talk about the safety aspect after an accident happens. These changes are required from media,” Aluthgama added.