Standard Chartered, Women Win and SERVE empower 15,000 girls through Goal Girl Empowerment Project

Standard Chartered has successfully empowered 15,000 young women and girls from underserved communities in Sri Lanka.

The transformative Goal Girl Empowerment Project is part of Futuremakers by Standard Chartered (Futuremakers), the Bank’s global initiative to tackle inequality by promoting economic inclusion for disadvantaged young people across its markets, including those affected by COVID-19

Launched in 2017 with funding from the Standard Chartered Foundation the programme was delivered by Women Win and SERVE, a Sri Lankan social work-based NGO. Goal was designed for adolescent girls aged 12 – 18 years from disadvantaged communities with the aim of harnessing the power of sports and life-skills education to tackle gender inequity and promote economic inclusion.

With a total investment of approximately LKR 67 million from the Standard Chartered Foundation, the programme aimed to equip young women with the confidence and skills to become economic leaders for themselves and their communities.

Standard Chartered Sri Lanka’s Head of Corporate Affairs, Brand & Marketing, Anuk De Silva, commented, “Standard Chartered is immensely proud of our seven-year partnership with Women Win and SERVE in implementing the groundbreaking ‘Goal Girl Empowerment Project’. Through the sports-based initiative, we have empowered over 15,000 target participants, addressing gender inequity, and creating economic inclusion among adolescent girls in Sri Lanka. The project also aligns with our global youth economic empowerment initiative ‘Futuremakers’ where we tackle inequality and promote greater economic inclusion. The Goal programme showcases our commitment to equipping young people, especially girls, with the skills and confidence to become future leaders. By breaking down barriers and promoting empowerment, the Goal project has paved the way for a more equitable and prosperous society.”

Fortude partners local and global universities to empower SL’s next-gen tech talent

LankaPay partners with UnionPay, revolutionizing cross-border ATM acceptance in Sri Lanka

Standard Chartered appoints Rukshila Seneviratne as new Head of Human Resources in Sri Lanka

Standard Chartered Priority to partner Soul Sounds to ring in season

Standard Chartered provides insights on global and Sri Lankan economic outlook at annual Research Briefing

Standard Chartered CEO appointed Chairperson of Sri Lanka Banks’ Association

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.