ACL Cables champions new fire-retardant cable standard SLS 733 for home safety

Sri Lanka Standards Institution invites public comments on ‘SLS 733 Part Two’

ACL Cables PLC, the pioneer in fire-retardant PVC cable technology in Sri Lanka, has announced its association with the ‘new fire-retardant cable standard SLS 733’ initiative as the promoter which has vigorously and unceasingly campaigned for the formulation of higher standards for home safety.

The Sri Lanka Standards Institution (SLS) has invited public comments for its recent fire safety standards for electrical cables. The ‘SLS 733 Part Two’ primarily focuses on establishing strict criteria for flame-retardant PVC cables, a standard that could set a benchmark for cable safety in Sri Lanka. The new standard will help consumers identify genuine flame-retardant cables that meet essential safety benchmarks.

As the first company to introduce flame-retardant PVC cables to the Sri Lankan market in 2005, ACL Cables has actively campaigned for the development of more stringent safety standards in the electrical industry. The company’s advocacy has played a crucial role in bringing about these new regulatory guidelines, which aim to establish clear criteria for flame-retardant cables and protect consumers from potentially misleading product claims, reinforcing a long-standing commitment to enhancing home safety across the nation.

For nearly two decades, ACL Cables has demonstrated its commitment to public safety by making fire-retardant PVC cables accessible to a broad consumer base through affordable pricing, maintaining rigorous quality standards in fire-retardant technology, actively promoting awareness about the importance of fire safety in electrical installations, and supporting regulatory initiatives that enhance consumer protection.

“Our position as the industry pioneer in flame-retardant technology comes with a responsibility to advocate for higher safety standards,” said ACL Cables Managing Director Suren Madanayake. “The proposed SLS 733 Part Two standard represents an important landmark in the company’s ongoing mission to make Sri Lankan homes safer through superior electrical infrastructure and aligns perfectly with ACL’s long-standing mission to prioritise home safety and consumer protection in the electrical industry.”

Importantly, PVC-based flame-retardant cables can withstand high temperatures generated in the event of an electrical short circuit and prevent fire propagation, providing critical protection in residential, commercial, and industrial settings. The standardisation will ensure that consumers have access to products that meet strict quality and safety standards, reducing the risk of fire and its potentially devastating effects.

As ACL Cables continues to support the Sri Lanka Standards Institution (SLS), the company encourages all stakeholders, including manufacturers, engineers, consumer safety advocates, and the general public, to participate in the public comment period for SLS 733 Part Two. This inclusive approach aims to capture insights from all parties affected by the new standards, ensuring the final version of SLS 733 Part Two aligns with the needs and expectations of Sri Lanka’s growing consumer base.