Misinformation on Aesthetic studies misleads society: experts

Colombo, Sep. 16 (Daily Mirror) - “There is no use of the Arts, one can prosper by becoming a doctor or an engineer. Don’t think of studying the Arts but try to become a doctor or an engineer. This has been the mindset of most parents in Sri Lanka over the years and they have not encouraged their children to study the Arts. However, one must remember that the Arts could do much more than anyone could imagine. This was the message given by some Sri Lankan academic experts at a media briefing recently.

“The Arts is used from birth to death though many will not imagine. A child is exposed to music from the time of birth. The first song a child hears is a mother’s lullaby. When a doctor looks at an X -ray, he actually looks at a work of art which depicts the inside of a human body. It is the same when it comes to an ultrasound scan. These works of art are done using modern technologies. Therefore, the Arts is everywhere,” Vice Chancellor of the University of Visual and Performing Arts, Professor. Rohan Netthsinghe said.

“Sri Lankan peasants used cattle for paddy cultivation. How many farmers use cattle today?. Obviously very few machinery such as ‘ Boothaya’ is used in farming today. Some rituals performed by indigenous people are dying. The future generations will get to know about these traditions only through research papers. This is why research on the Arts is essential. This alone creates opportunities in the Arts though some argue that the Arts is of no use,” he added.

Professor Nethsinghe together with the Registrar of the University of Visual and Performing Arts, Dr. Chani Imbulgoda and Director, Centre for Research and Creative Work and Knowledge Dissemination of the University, Prof. Tharanga Dandeniya then announced a special programme UVPA PRAXIS 2026, an international conference to be held at the University premises on September 16th to the 18th.

“The objective of the programme is to inform outsiders what kind of work is carried out by the University of Visual and Performing Arts and what it has to offer where careers are concerned. We invite school children, teachers and youth to visit this event and find out what the Arts could offer,” Professor Nethsinghe added. He said the career fair on September 17 will help youth to find out about qualifications needed to secure jobs in the Arts. Around 20 institutions representing the government and the private sector will participate at the fair.

UVPA PRAXIS 2026 will comprise keynote speeches by local and international experts, panel discussions, performance items and screening of movies, paintings and photography exhibitions. The subjects covered will be traditional arts, history and memory, traditional dance identity and cultural continuance, digital media , visual semiotics and communication , heritage , ritual space and cultural identity, embodied dance technique and practice based knowledge, embodied dance techniques and practice based knowledge , music education , professional practice and therapy and performance pedagogy, movement and scenography, community memory and embodied expressions, music language , emotion and embodied performance and the Arts, community. Society and cultural change.

“We hope to build a bridge between tradition and cultural heritage and modernity,” Professor Nettisinghe said.

International expert of folk music Professor Svanibor Pettem, performance artist Tim Crouch are expected to participate in the event.