PM vows NPP will seize historic opportunity to represent all citizens

Says current Parliament reflects people’s rejection of SL’s traditional elite political system

Emphasises public has not rejected politics itself but a corrupt political culture characterised by misuse of power and corruption

Highlights collective effort behind President’s policy statement and says it’s a result of consistent and collaborative development over years

Prime Minister Dr. Harini Amarasuriya has declared that the current Parliament represents a historic mandate, marking the people’s rejection of the traditional elite political system.

Speaking during the opening of the Parliamentary debate on the President’s policy statement yesterday, Dr. Amarasuriya stressed that the public has not rejected politics itself but a corrupt political culture that misuses power.

“How was it possible for the President to make a speech without even looking at a leaf? That is a collective policy that we have all come together and developed over many years. This is not something we did overnight. We presented a consistent policy that has been built over a period of time.” she said highlighting the collective effort behind the President’s policy statement.

Dr. Amarasuriya underlined the significance of the people’s mandate, emphasising the rejection of corruption and the misuse of power that have plagued governance in the past.

“For a long time, the governance of our country has deteriorated severely. It has led to misuse of power. Corruption has increased. The people have firmly rejected such a corrupt political culture. The people have rejected traditional political party leaders with disgust,” she said.

The Prime Minister praised the intelligence and political maturity of the electorate, who, she noted, have built a movement representing a participatory and democratic new political culture.

“What did the voters of our country show? They are not rejecting politics; they are rejecting that corrupt political culture that abuses power. Instead, they have proven that the people of our country have the intelligence and political maturity to build a political movement that represents a new political culture,” Dr. Amarasuriya said.

She called for the Government to seize the historic opportunity to represent all citizens of the country, noting that the public’s political awakening is reflected in the composition and mandate of the current Parliament. “We will not let go of that opportunity,” the Prime Minister affirmed.