Sri Lanka EDB, collaborators to pick 10 pioneering brands for capacity building

ECONOMYNEXT – The Export Development Board (EDB), Institute for Future Creations (TIFC), London College of Fashion (UAL) and Chamber of Ethical Lifestyle Enterprises (CELE), launched the ‘Creative Sri Lanka 2030’ project to promote ethical, sustainable manufacturing and increase export of value-added, niche products.

As part of this initiative, 10 pioneering Sri Lankan brands will be selected to showcase the nation’s dedication to sustainability, ethical practices, and cultural heritage on a global scale, with support from CELE and Good Life X.

“Chosen for their commitment to ethical standards, sustainability, and social responsibility, these ten brands will undergo a comprehensive capacity-building program,” the EDB said.

The program seeks to promote Sri Lankan crafts internationally and make a significant impact on the local economy by fostering a sustainable business model that benefits artisans and their communities.

The global creative industry is one of the fastest-growing economic sectors globally, with high engagement of SME entrepreneurs, and recognized for its substantial role as a contributor to the gross domestic product (GDP) in many nations.

“The Sri Lankan Creative Industry also has significant potential to contribute to the economy, given Sri Lanka’s inherent craftsmanship, cultural diversity, and rich natural resources. These provide the base for a wide range of creative industries such as art, crafts, design, fashion, filming, performing arts, heritage, architecture, Sri Lanka’s cuisines, and more.”

“To realize this potential, Sri Lanka must continuously seek new and sustainable sources of growth. This is essential to revitalize our economy and create new job opportunities that align with the aspirations of our young people.

“TIFC and UAL have conducted research on “Sri Lanka’s Crafting Potential: Sustainable Trade and Development for Sri Lanka’s artisanal sector” to gain an in-depth understanding of the Sri Lankan craft sector for future interventions, with the three key pillars innovation, collaboration, and education in mind, and a research report has been prepared. (Colombo/May27/2024)