‘US sanctions preventing Russia and Sri Lanka from getting the best out of bilateral trade links’

The full economic potential in Russia–Sri Lanka trade and tourism cannot be realized due to U.S. sanctions, Russian ambassador to Sri Lanka Levan Dzhagaryan said at a forum in Colombo on September 30.

“Direct flight operations would resume between Russia and Sri Lanka next month, but Russian tourists would be compelled to carry cash in hand since electronic transactions were impossible in Sri Lanka because of sanctions against Russia by the US. Further, credit cards are being blocked, Dzhagaryan told the media during the round table discussion with him organized by the Pathfinder Foundation. The event was held at the Colombo Club, Hotel Taj Samudra, Colombo.

“Russia currently has direct air links with the Maldives and will resume direct flights to Colombo after suspending for six months. However, Russian nationals enjoy a one-month visa-free stay in China. Tourist arrivals from Russia to Sri Lanka have increased over the years, with over 200,000 Russians arriving here last year, the ambassador said.

Dzhagaryan added: “There are huge potential gains in Russia-Sri Lanka trade in case sanctions are lifted. It could be seen only after the Russia–Ukraine war is over.

“Lifting sanctions is one major condition by the Russian side to end the war. But our stance is that Ukraine should not be part of NATO and remain an independent, neutral country. Because Ukraine joining NATO has a major security risk for Russia. The Russian position is clear that Ukraine should not join NATO, no matter what. It should remain neutral.”

The ambassador said that Russia welcomes Sri Lanka joining BRICS but he refrained from commenting on President Anura Kumara Dissanayake’s non-acceptance of the invitation to attend the summit last year, despite an invitation by Russian President Vladimir Putin. He said he handed over the invitation, but it was the sovereign decision of Sri Lanka to accept it or not.

He further said that Russia cannot go for major investments in Sri Lanka due to the sanctions. He did not see sanctions being lifted in the foreseeable future.

‘The Routes we Take’ wraps up in Batticaloa, and heads to Ahangama for the final event

The Sri Lanka–Japan Business Council leads successful delegation to Japan

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.