Sri Lanka budget revenues up 58-pct to October, domestic borrowings down

ECONOMYNEXT – Sri Lanka’s budget revenues have reached 8.0 percent by October 2023, up 53 percent to 2,434 billion rupees, while tax revenues surged 58 percent to 2,212 billion rupees, official data shows.

The overall budget deficit and domestic borrowings were down from last year.

In the month of October, tax collections were 278 billion rupees, compared to 121 billion rupees last year, amid higher personal and valued added tax rates despite revenue losses from a vehicle import ban.

Sri Lanka hiked personal income tax rates and value added tax to maintain a bloated state following a sovereign default in 2022 triggered by ‘macro-economic policy’ involving rate cuts on top of tax cuts.

Departing from the earlier ‘revenue based fiscal consolidation’ which led to an expansion of the state, officials are now also trying to cut expenses (spending-based consolidation).

Tax revenues were 7.3 percent of GDP by October compared to 5.8 percent last year.

State Minister for Finance, Shehan Semasinghe has said revenues are likely to reach 11 percent of GDP which was the original budget target, which was revised down in November.

Current spending was 3,532 billion rupees by October up 27 percent from last year.

The revenue deficit was 1,107.4 billion rupees, down absolutely from 1,192.7 billion rupees.

Capital and net lending was down 2 percent to 448.8 billion rupees with most infrastructure projects halted following a sovereign default.

The revenue deficit was also down 6 percent absolutely to 1,556.2 billion rupees.

The overall deficit, after grants was also down absolutely by 6 percent to 1,547 billion rupees.

Domestic borrowings were down to 9 percent to 1,447 billion rupees.

The primary balance (deficit before interest costs) tracked by the International Monetary Fund was 225.37 billion rupees, improving from 477.4 billon rupees a year earlier.

In an IMF program the overall deficit and interest costs tends to rise in the first year as rates are hiked to stop monetary excesses (inflationary rate cuts or macro-economic policy) that originally triggers an external crisis or external sovereign default.

Sri Lanka has high nominal interest rates due to an anchor-conflicting monetary regime (an unstable intermediate regime labelled a ‘flexible’ exchange rate involving regime flipping)

Interest costs were 1,772.4 billion rupees, up 52 percent from a year earlier.

If a central bank is able to operated a single anchor monetary regime over tie, avoiding inflationary rate cuts, interest rates plunge to those found in advanced and hard pegged nations or dollarized ones like Cambodia.