The Council for Business with Britain appoints Ameena Ziauddin president at 26th Annual General Meeting

The Council for Business with Britain (CBB) of The Ceylon Chamber of Commerce held its 26th Annual General Meeting at Westminster House, Colombo, bringing together members and stakeholders committed to strengthening trade and investment relations between Sri Lanka and the United Kingdom.

Ms. Ameena Ziauddin, Managing Director of Norfolk Foods, was elected president of the Council for Business with Britain for the 2026–2027 term. Shiluka Goonewardene, Principal and Head of Deal Advisory at KPMG in Sri Lanka, assumed office as Senior Vice President, while Fadhil Jiffry, Chief Financial Officer of LSEG, was elected Vice President. Ms. Krystle Reid Wijesuriya, Chief Executive Officer of We Are Team Rocket, was elected Treasurer. Immediate Past President Mark Surgenor, CEO, of HSBC will continue to serve on the Committee.

The following companies were elected to serve on the Council’s Committee for 2026–2027: Aitken Spence Travels (Pvt) Ltd, GTN Technologies (Pvt) Ltd, Hayleys PLC, Hilton Colombo Residences, John Keells Holdings PLC, MAS Holdings (Pvt) Ltd, Ocean Pick (Pvt) Ltd, Point to Point Consulting, Unilever Sri Lanka Limited, Wilton Metal Box Company (Pvt) Ltd.

The Council also invited Ms. Asanthi Fernando, Head of Trade & Investment at the British High Commission; Sanath Manatunge, Chief Executive Officer of Commercial Bank of Ceylon PLC; Ms. Hannah Wells, Principal of The British School in Colombo; and Orlando Edwards, Country Director of the British Council Sri Lanka, to serve on the Committee by invitation. Shirendra Lawrence, Ms. Roshanie Moraes, and Ms. Tania Polonnowita were appointed to the Advisory Committee, ensuring continuity and strategic guidance for the Council’s future initiatives.

Dialog recognised as Sri Lanka’s Most Loved Service and Telecommunications Brand for third consecutive year

Hayleys Aventura introduces Sri Lanka’s first automated rotary parking system

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.