DIMO enhances Rank Container Terminals efficiency with Kalmar Reach Stacker

DIMO recently supplied a Kalmar Reach Stacker to Rank Container Terminals (RCT), a prominent player in the country’s logistics industry. The delivery took place at RCT’s Orugodawaththa facility with the participation of RCT officials, customs officers, and DIMO representatives.

The Kalmar Reach Stacker is a versatile and efficient solution designed to handle, transport, and stack shipping containers. It is known for its flexibility and ability to efficiently stack containers and move them across short distances. The DRU450 is crucial for streamlining logistics operations and optimizing port and terminal efficiency. This is an ideal solution for ports, terminals, and intermodal yards to handle and transport shipping containers.

Ravi Wijeratne, Chairman of RCT said, “We are confident that the state-of-the-art Kalmar Reach Stacker will significantly enhance our operations with its superior handling, streamlined container stacking, and quick maneuverability. Built around Kalmer’s best-in-class series of equipment, this truck boasts superior operator ergonomics and easy serviceability with its efficient performance parameters and extended product life cycle, the DRU450 is the best reach stacker offering maximum value for money. We selected Kalmar from DIMO for its proven track record of reliability, advanced technology, and top-tier performance in container handling equipment. DIMO, as Kalmar’s local agent, provides expert support, timely service, and a commitment to maintaining high operational standards, making it the ideal choice for optimizing our logistics efficiency.”

Chaminda Ranawana, Executive Director at DIMO, said, “With Sri Lanka’s strategic location and the growing demand for efficient cargo handling, DIMO, together with Kalmar, is poised to play a crucial role in shaping the country’s logistics landscape. Kalmar’s advanced equipment, coupled with DIMO’s unparalleled aftersales service, offers a winning combination for enhancing port productivity and sustainability. As Sri Lanka aims to become a regional logistics hub, we are committed to providing the innovative solutions needed to drive its success.”

NDB leads digital future with multiple wins at SLIM DIGIS 2.4

Sargia Sri Lanka ramps up destination marketing in expansion drive

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.