Sysco LABS partners with EDEX EXPO 2026 to shape the next generation of tech talent

Sysco LABS Sri Lanka, the Global Innovation Center of Sysco Corporation, recently partnered with EDEX EXPO 2026, as the Principal Sponsor of the renowned Expo’s Job Exhibition. The collaboration provided a structured platform for Sysco LABS to interact with emerging talent, offering guidance, exposure, and career insights while contributing to the growth of a skilled and future-ready technology talent pool in Sri Lanka.

This year’s EDEX EXPO brought together students, graduates and professionals exploring career and higher education opportunities. As the Principal Sponsor of the job fair, Sysco LABS played a leading role in engaging young talent, demystifying careers in technology, and showcasing a breadth of opportunities available within the industry.

At EDEX EXPO 2026, Sysco LABS engaged directly with attendees through two dedicated stalls—the Sysco LABS Academy stall and the Sysco LABS Careers stall. The Sysco LABS Academy stall focused on guiding students toward technology career pathways, industry expectations, and skill development, offering insights into how young talent can prepare for careers in the technology sector. The Careers stall provided students and graduates with information on open roles, career tracks, and potential growth opportunities within Sysco LABS, while enabling direct conversations with teams on life at Sysco LABS, its culture, and opportunities to work at the global-scale technology arm of the largest food-service provider in the world.

Commenting on the partnership, Thushera Kawdawatta, Managing Director of Sysco LABS said, “Partnering with EDEX EXPO 2026 reinforces our deep belief in Sri Lanka’s potential as a global innovation hub. At Sysco LABS, we aren’t just offering jobs; we are providing a platform for local talent engineer solutions that power the world’s largest foodservice company. As the four-time ICT Exporter of the Year at the Presidential Export Awards, we have proven that Sri Lankan tech talent can compete at the highest level. We want to inspire the next generation to view technology not just as a career, but as a vehicle for driving global transformation.”

PFEC Global’s World Study Fair 2026 attracts strong participation in Colombo

Sri Lanka Tourism makes a strong impression at CMT 2026 in Stuttgart, Germany

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.