Pro-RW Pohottuwa MPs say support for him remains unchanged

SLPP’s Rohitha Abeygunawardena claims supporters are urging party leaders to maintain their support for Ranil Wickremesinghe

SLPP MP Prasanna Ranatunga opines announcement of Namal Rajapaksa’s candidacy was made simply to fulfil need for an announcement

SLPP MP S.B. Dissanayake says Namal will not contest as it would spell the end of his political career

Sri Lanka Podujana Peramuna (SLPP) MPs who recently pledged their support to President Ranil Wickremesinghe have reaffirmed their decision to oppose the SLPP’s choice of candidate.

The group convened with Minister Harin Fernando at a meeting in Battaramulla yesterday to deliberate on their next steps.

After the meeting, Chief Government Whip Prasanna Ranatunge told the media that until late Tuesday, Dhammika Perera was expected to be announced as the party’s candidate.

“Perhaps the announcement of Namal Rajapaksa’s candidacy was made simply to fulfil the need for an announcement. However, it does not align with the party’s needs or the desires of its grassroots supporters,” he remarked.

He predicted that the SLPP’s decision might change, citing that there are many valid reasons for reconsideration. “Let us discuss this matter then,” he said.

SLPP stalwart MP S.B. Dissanayake also expressed similar sentiments. “He will not contest,” Dissanayake said referring to Namal Rajapaksa.

“I strongly believe he will not contest. If he does, it will be the end for him and Mahinda Rajapaksa as well,” he opined.

Meanwhile, SLPP Kalutara District MP Rohitha Abeygunawardena said the people of his district are urging party leaders to maintain their support for Ranil Wickremesinghe. “When I consult with them, they are requesting that we allow the leader we brought in to continue his work,” he said.

State Minister Piyal Nishantha said he decided to support Wickremesinghe because the party leadership had previously indicated that Dhammika Perera would be the candidate. Nishantha said that if Namal Rajapaksa had been announced as the candidate earlier, many MPs might have chosen to stay with the SLPP and support him.