New Ambassador to Vietnam Poshitha Perera presents credentials

Sri Lanka’s new Ambassador to Vietnam, Poshitha Perera presented his Letters of Credence to General Secretary and President of the Socialist Republic of Vietnam To Lam, during a ceremony at the President’s office in Hanoi on 17 September.

The event featured a ceremonial Guard of Honour, followed by the official presentation of credentials and a courtesy call on the President of Vietnam by the new Ambassador. Senior officials from both the President’s Office and the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Vietnam were in attendance.

General Secretary and President To Lam extended a warm welcome to Ambassador Perera and conveyed his best wishes for the latter’s tenure in Vietnam. Further, he reaffirmed Vietnam’s commitment to enhance relations with Sri Lanka, recognising the longstanding friendship between the two nations and also acknowledging Sri Lanka’s support to his country in multilateral forums.

In response, Ambassador Perera conveyed greetings from President Ranil Wickremesinghe to the Vietnamese General Secretary and President. He expressed his intent to further strengthen the bilateral relationship, with a focus on expanding cooperation in multiple areas including those of economic development, trade, agriculture, education, culture, and people-to-people ties.

Ambassador Perera also briefed General Secretary and President To Lam on Sri Lanka’s recent economic progress, emphasising that the country has returned to normalcy, creating a favourable environment for foreign investments. He highlighted the historical strength of Sri Lanka-Vietnam relations and underscored the importance of exploring opportunities for enhancing trade and investment between the two countries.

Prior to being appointed Sri Lanka’s Ambassador to Vietnam, Poshitha Perera served as the Director General of the East Asia Division at the Ministry of Foreign Affairs in Colombo. An officer of the 2003 batch of the Sri Lanka Foreign Service, his diplomatic career includes postings at Sri Lankan Embassies in Austria, Italy, and Kuwait in various capacities.

Ambassador Perera holds a Bachelor’s degree from the University of Kelaniya, and a Master’s degree in International Relations from the University of Colombo. He is also an Attorney-at-Law, having completed his legal studies at the Sri Lanka Law College. Ambassador Perera is a past student of Nalanda College, Colombo.