Beyond Negombo, Bogambara, and Mahamodara

The government has come under heavy criticism over its decision to abandon a plan to convert the former Bogambara Prison, Kandy, into a modern hotel complex, restore the status quo ante and repurpose the Mahamodara Hospital, Galle, as a prison. Desperate times are said to call for desperate measures. Recent riots in the overcrowded Negombo Prison have jolted the government into addressing the issue of overcrowding.

Prison congestion did not arise after the 2024 regime change. Successive governments have let the grass grow under their feet, and the current dispensation has had to grasp the nettle; its difficulties need to be appreciated. The Opposition and other opponents of the aforesaid government move to set up new prisons in an ad hoc manner ought to stop protesting and propose alternative ways and means of managing the issue.

Overcrowding is one of the root causes of prison unrest and violence. Sri Lanka’s prisons are said to accommodate as many as 41,000 inmates or about 400% more than they are equipped to hold. It has been reported that the anti-drug campaigns and the resultant arrests have led to a huge increase in the number of prison inmates. Media reports, quoting the Department of Prisons, have placed the increase between 2021 and 2024 at a staggering 65%. Why no action was taken to address this problem earlier is the question.

The Negombo Prison, where riots snuffed out 28 lives including those of eight officers recently, was holding as many as 2,400 inmates at the time of the incidents whereas it has space and facilities only for 650 prisoners. Inmates become aggressive when they have no space for sleeping, and basic medical and hygienic facilities are scarce. So, it is high time the problem of prison overcrowding is tackled as a national priority. There could be a wave of copycat prison disturbances.

There are also other causative factors that need to be addressed urgently. The prison system is under immense strain owing to the ever-increasing remand prisoner population and prolonged custody due to judicial delays. Many suspects spend months, if not years, in prisons. Researchers have proposed solutions to the issues affecting prisons, but successive governments have ignored them. Action is called for to expedite trials and ensure that bail is granted wherever possible and adopt modern methods, such as using electronic ankle monitors where low-risk suspects are concerned.

The state ought to get rid of its overreliance on imprisonment for minor offences. Instead, it should consider rehabilitation, community-based supervision, as options, experts have suggested over the years. Sadly, the police and the Attorney General’s Department apparently do everything in their power to have the opponents of governments in power held on remand for extended periods to please their political masters. It has also become blatantly clear from the recent bout of prison riots that efforts so far made to curb drug trafficking in prisons have not yielded the desired results due to various factors, particularly corruption among prison officers. A solution to this issue will continue to elude the prison system unless intelligence gathering and surveillance are strengthened with modern technology being used to prevent organised crime suspects and convicts in prison from communicating with their associates outside.

Violence erupts in prisons also due to lack of proper classification of prisoners and action to hold them separately, as was the case in the Negombo Prison. Hardcore criminals must be separated from other inmates, and the so-called officer-to-inmate ratio has to be increased urgently. Worryingly, it has not been possible to recruit the required number of prison officers due to declining attractiveness of prison service and bureaucratic delays, Minister of Justice and National Integration Harshana Nanayakkara has recently told Parliament, explaining why the government has not been able to fill 1,300 vacancies in prison service. The recent murder of prison officers in Negombo is bound to make the government’s efforts even more difficult. Ensuring the safety of prison officers, enhancing their salaries and perks and providing them with better training may help make prison service attractive to the youth.

Prison reform initiatives have not brought about the intended results during the past several decades due to deficiencies therein. The need has arisen for a comprehensive, multi-pronged national prison reform strategy integrating judicial reform, sentencing policy, rehabilitation, staffing and infrastructural development, prisoner welfare and independent oversight. This is what the government and the Opposition should discuss in Parliament and at other fora, instead of locking horns and trading insults.

Prime land in urban centres, such as Colombo, Kandy and Galle, should be utilised for high-income-generating activities, and the prisons situated there should be relocated for security, economic and aesthetic reasons. One can only hope that the prisons to be set up at Bogambara and Mahamodara to ease overcrowding will serve as only stopgap measures until modern correctional facilities are built in appropriate locations.

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.