Sri Lanka diaspora fund online learning platform to provide education for all ages

ECONOMYNEXT – Sri Lanka has launched Public Learn, a platform which offers free courses from top universities, to provide those of all ages access to further education.

Operated by Regent Global, Public Learn is been funded by the Sri Lankan diaspora in the UK.

“This aims to transform Sri Lanka’s education and economy which aligns with #Digiecon2030 Mandate of the Ministry of Technology,” minister Kanaka Herath said.

“Whatever the faults of the education system, there are many, but we have still delivered. Now, this will help us make better use of the education system,” President Ranil Wickremesinghe said at the launch.

The initiative aims to provide broad access and accessibility to education Sri Lankans of all ages.

“In a global and competitive world, a skilled and educated populace is crucial,” Former Secretary of State for Education in the United Kingdom Sir Gavin Williamson, said at the launch.

“This is certainly an instrument that paves the way for a large number of Sri Lankans to get ahead in life and transform their country,” Wickremesinghe said.

“We are looking at a digital economy, looking at using the latest knowledge because Sri Lanka can only get ahead if we use our heads and think. And certainly, what we call reprogram.”

Regent Global Chief Executive Officer Dr Selva Pankaj said he and his wife who spent their formative years in Sri Lanka before leaving for the UK due to the civil war, were “proud to contribute to efforts aimed at enhancing the quality of life for Sri Lankans.”

Despite leaving at ages 13 and 19, their commitment to their homeland remained steadfast, with a strong desire to contribute to Sri Lanka’s future development, they said.

“I must first and foremost thank Dr Selva Pankaj for the gift he has given Sri Lanka. I call this reconciliation. We are living in a knowledge-intensive society. In such a society, if we are to get ahead, we should also join the race and certainly emerge as top players. That is not difficult for Sri Lanka,” Wickremesinghe said. (Colombo/Jun14/2024)