Solar industry warns of collapse due to CEB power curtailments

Sri Lanka’s solar power industry says it is facing collapse because its large power plants are being repeatedly and unnecessarily shut down by the Ceylon Electricity Board (CEB).

The Grid Connected Solar Power Association (GCSPA) issued a strong warning in Colombo recently, stating that the CEB’s actions are illegal, cause huge financial losses, and threaten the country’s renewable energy goals.

For the last nine months, every weekend, the CEB has been switching off major solar power plants across the country. According to Eng. Prabath Wickramasinghe, President of the GCSPA, this directly breaks the “Must Run” contracts the plants have with the CEB. These contracts promise that solar power will always be accepted into the national grid.

“The financial damage is severe. Total losses are close to Rs. 2 billion, and the monthly income of solar power companies has dropped by 15%. This practice, called curtailment, is crippling the local industry that provides 3,300 MW of clean electricity”, he said.

Wickramasinghe pointed out a major contradiction saying that when solar power is shut off, the CEB continues to burn expensive diesel to generate electricity.

“Furthermore, a solution to store solar power – Battery Energy Storage Systems (BESS) – was approved by the Cabinet has been stalled due to CEB inaction. These batteries would save solar energy for later use and stop the need for cuts. Making matters worse, a proposed new National Electricity Policy could be the final blow. This policy plans to scrap the protective Feed-in Tariff system, which guarantees a price for solar power. It would also deny compensation for the power cuts and demand payments only in rupees for loans taken in foreign currency, causing exchange rate risks. This could bankrupt the local entrepreneurs who invested in solar power,” Wickramasinghe said.

“It goes against government policy and could cause a banking crisis when these businesses cannot pay their loans,” he added.

The GCSPA made the following urgent requests to the government, at the press conference.

* Immediately start the battery storage (BESS) system with clear guidelines.

* Stop the illegal weekend power cuts and pay for the losses already caused.

The association stated that the coming weeks are critical for Sri Lanka’s solar power future, which now hangs in the balance due to these actions.

Rajendra Theagarajah recognised with SLID–ACCA Silver Award for board leadership excellence

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.