Probe Sallay’s complaint

Former Director of the State Intelligence Service Maj. Gen. (retd.) Suresh Sallay, currently being detained at the Criminal Investigation Department (CID) over the Easter Sunday terror attacks, has begun a hunger strike in protest against alleged inhumane treatment by CID officers. His wife has complained to Inspector General of Police (IGP) Priyantha Weerasuriya about the conditions of detention. She has told the media that Sallay is determined to continue his hunger strike. The police have denied mistreating Sallay.

Sallay has suffered physical and psychological abuse, at the hands of the CID, according to his lawyers. One of his counsel, Udaya Gammanpila, told the media on Saturday that Sallay was even denied proper meals, and the previous night the CID had served a small portion of rice with some gravy on a piece of newspaper placed on the floor of his cell. That had prompted Sallay to launch the hunger strike, Gammanpila said. Curiously, a notorious drug dealer, Nadun Chintaka alias Harak Kata, was allowed to consume food from the CID canteen while being detained at the CID.

Sri Lanka’s overcrowded, squalid remand prisons are hellholes, and even a brief stay there amounts to punishment, as is public knowledge. The same goes for the detention or holding cells at the CID headquarters. Degrading interrogation practices, including psychological coercion and physical abuse, aimed at breaking a suspect’s will, are antithetical to international good practices followed by modern crime investigators in civilised societies. Unfortunately, some officers of Sri Lanka police have used such cruel methods with impunity under successive governments. One may recall that a high-ranking police officer found guilty of having violated a suspect’s fundamental rights and the ban on torture was appointed IGP. Deshabandu Tennakoon is his name.

Allegations made by Sallay through his lawyers and family members against the police remind us of the horrors of the Spanish Inquisition, Nazi Straflager (punishment camps), Gestapo interrogation centres, the CIA black sites and the Batalanda torture chamber. Hence the need to do away with the draconian Prevention of Terrorism Act, which allows suspects to be detained indefinitely and made to undergo untold suffering in the name of interrogation.

A very serious allegation frequently levelled against Sri Lanka police is that they make arrests, detain suspects, and conduct investigations to support political motives rather than to establish facts impartially. Justice and public trust in the legal and judicial processes become the victims of the partiality, if not servility, of the police and some of the Attorney General’s Department personnel to the powers that be and their deplorable efforts to support popular political narratives about crimes.

The integrity of the ongoing CID investigation into the Easter Sunday terror attacks is severely compromised, for the JVP-NPP government has elevated a member of the NPP’s Retired Police Collective (NPPRPC), Shani Abeysekera, as the CID Director to probe the Easter Sunday terror attacks, which the CID itself failed to prevent while he was serving as its Director in 2019, when the current Public Security Ministry Secretary Ravi Seneviratne, also a member of the NPPRPC, was the Senior DIG in charge of the CID. All those who failed to prevent the carnage in spite of repeated warnings of the impending bomb attacks must be brought to justice. President Anura Kumara Dissanayake has caused quite a stir by making predictions about judgements to be delivered in court cases against his political opponents and drawn heavy criticism from the Bar Association of Sri Lanka and other lawyers’ associations for trying to raise the retirement ages of the superior court judges arbitrarily. How can the current dispensation be expected to uphold the rule of law, justice and fair play?

The denial of a suspect’s right to be heard, with the prosecutors, given to rehearsed, performative courtroom presentations, making various allegations designed to generate headlines and please the powers that be, violates the principle of natural justice. Justice must be served for the Easter Sunday terror victims, but without injustice to suspects in custody.

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.