Asian Paints Causeway Unveils ‘ColourNext-2024’ in Colombo

Asian Paints Causeway Head – Marketing and Activations Anuradha Edirisinghe, Sri Lanka Institute of Architects President Architect Rohana Bandara Herath, Asian Paints International Regional Head Sireesh Rao and Principal Specialist – Colour Marketing Mariesha Rego Dsouza

One of Sri Lanka’s largest paint manufacturers, Asian Paints Causeway, recently launched ‘ColourNext-2024’ at a grand event held in Colombo.

‘ColourNext’ is a comprehensive, annual forecast of design directions in colours, materials, textures, and finishes, compiled by Asian Paints in collaboration with experts from various creative disciplines, including architecture, art, interiors, fashion, sociology, media, and FMCG. ‘ColourNext’ is celebrated as South Asia’s premier and unique intelligence in colour and material forecasting.

The launch of ‘ColourNext-2024’ marks the inaugural edition of ‘ColourNext’ in Sri Lanka. The event hosted an esteemed group of architects and interior designers, alongside notable figures such Asian Paints International Ltd. Regional Head Sireesh Rao, General Manager Sales and Marketing (Sri Lanka) Vaithilingam Kiritharan, Head of Marketing (Sri Lanka) Anuradha Edirisinghe, and the Senior Management of Asian Paints Causeway.

In his keynote address Asian Paints International Ltd. Chief Executive Pragyan Kumar, emphasised the importance of creating visually stunning and culturally resonant spaces. He went on to say: “Asian Paints relentlessly analyses global trends and their local relevance to inspire designs that reflect a holistic understanding of consumers. Renowned experts have put in tremendous efforts to bring the latest ‘trends’ to the forefront through this report.” Pragyan also added: “Our aim is to push innovation by creating future-ready, functionally and aesthetically pleasing colours and textures that will greatly enhance the lifestyle of general people.”

The forecast report announced the colour of the year as ‘Terra’, a shade that resonates deeply with Sri Lanka’s natural beauty. From the warm golden hues of sun-kissed beaches to the earthy tones of rugged mountains, Sri Lanka’s natural palette is a feast for the eyes. ‘Terra’ captures this serenity and warmth, inviting people to bring these hues into their own homes.

In addition to ‘Terra’, the report revealed four other colour trends: ‘Soil’, an innovative material fuelling creativity and design experimentation; ‘Into the Deep’, which embraces the fantastic depths of oceanic marvels; ‘Retro-futurism’, offering a gaze into the future through the lens of familiar landscapes, attire, and folklore; and ‘Goblin Mode’, reflecting a liberating detachment from the endless chase for perfection.

The event saw enthusiastic participation from over 125 key architects and interior designers, marking it as a significant milestone for the local fraternity. It was widely commented that this is the first time such a global event of this magnitude has been experienced on Sri Lankan soil. Inspired by the event, architects and interior designers expressed confidence that the newly introduced colour themes would help create even better living spaces for Sri Lankan consumers.