Strange bedfellows, ‘comrades’, and polls

How long the Provincial Councils (PCs) will remain unelected is anybody’s guess. All of them are currently under the provincial Governors appointed by the President. There have been five Presidents and four governments since the conclusion of the last PC elections held on a staggered basis between 2012 and 2014. The JVP-NPP government is under increasing pressure to hold the much-delayed PC polls. The NPP’s National Policy Framework, A Thriving Nation: A Beautiful Life, promises to hold the PC elections within one year of forming a government. But the government is now wary of holding elections because its performance at last year’s local LG polls fell below its expectations just seven months after its spectacular win at the 2024 general election.

The Opposition has sought to capitalise on what is described as the government’s fear of elections. It is cranking up pressure on the JVP/NPP to stop trotting out lame excuses and hold the PC elections.

JVP General Secretary Tilvin Silva caused quite a stir the other day by declaring that funds allocated by Budget 2026 for the PC elections had been spent on disaster relief and therefore PC elections could not be held this year. The Opposition and Election monitors lashed out at the government for its efforts to postpone the PC polls on some flimsy pretext. The NPP politicians have since claimed there are funds for elections but stopped short of specifying when the PC polls will be held.

Now, the Election Commission says it is ready to conduct the PC polls soon if Parliament passes a law, enabling it to do so under the PR system instead of the Mixed Proportional system. The Treasury says it is ready to release funds. The Opposition says it is ready to face an election, but the JVP/NPP is not ready. It is unbecoming of a government that flaunts its two-thirds majority in Parliament to postpone elections.

Ironically, the Opposition political parties that castigate the JVP-NPP government for delaying the PC polls helped the UNP-led Yahapalana government amend the Provincial Council Elections Act in a deplorable manner and postpone the PC polls indefinitely. The JVP fully backed the Yahapalana administration, which avoided an election in 2017 for fear of suffering a midterm electoral defeat.

At a Joint Opposition media briefing on Wednesday, the UNP proposed that all Opposition parties close ranks and form a common electoral front to defeat the government in the next PC polls. That strategy has worked in the cooperative society elections, where the Opposition turned the tables on the government in many areas. Those contests serve as electoral weather vanes, indicating the direction of political winds. Opposition parties have gained control of many cooperative societies by preventing a split in the anti-government vote. That is no mean achievement for the Opposition.

However, the dynamics of contests and voting patterns do not remain constant at different elections, and therefore the question is how advisable it is to extrapolate a trend from the cooperative society elections and political alignments related to them.

The difficulty of bringing Opposition parties under one banner became evident on Wednesday itself. The SJB and the SLPP were not represented at the Opposition media briefing, according to press reports. It may be too early to say whether they, too, will join the grand Opposition alliance in the offing, but bringing a diverse group of politicians together to contest elections is a Herculean task.

Electoral alliances, formed by strange bedfellows with competing ambitions and espousing different ideologies are fissiparous and fragile. They tend to collapse even after being elected to power, plunging political institutions into chaos. History is full of such instances. The fate that befell the so-called National Unity government, or the Yahapalana administration, as it was popularly known, is a case in point. Three years into office, the uneasy alliance between the UNP and the SLFP collapsed, rendering that government dysfunctional to the extent of endangering national security. It is hoped that the government will muster the courage to hold the PC polls before long and that no councils will end up hung.

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.