Ceylinco Life grand draw sets Family Savari 19 winners on journeys abroad and at home

Ceylinco Life, Sri Lanka’s life insurance market leader, has concluded the grand draw of the 19th edition of its iconic Family Savari mega promotion, selecting hundreds of winning families for unforgettable overseas holidays and local leisure experiences, while marking a colourful first with the selection of winners from its ‘Run for Savari game.’

At the draw, five policyholder families, a total of 20 people, were chosen to win the top prize of an all-expenses-paid holiday in Beijing. These families are served by the Ceylinco Life branches in Wennappuwa, Kelaniya, Godakawela, Kamburupitiya and Homagama.

In addition, 10 families, comprising 40 people, were selected to enjoy a fully sponsored holiday in Malaysia, while a further 283 families, 1,000 people in all, won a day of excitement and entertainment at the Pearl Bay theme park.

The grand draw also broke new ground by selecting winners of ‘Run for Savari,’ the web-based game that opened up the Family Savari experience to non-policyholders for the first time. Four winners were drawn from among the 100 highest scorers in the game to receive stays at star-class hotels in Sri Lanka. Earlier, 14 weekly winners were rewarded with supermarket vouchers worth Rs. 10,000 each.

The highest scorer among the 7,500 plus people that played Run for Savari was also announced at the draw. Hailing from Wellawatte, the winner amassed an impressive 109,458 points and will also be rewarded by Ceylinco Life with a holiday in Malaysia.

With the conclusion of the draw, arrangements will now commence for the overseas tours and the local excursion, extending the Family Savari experience to a new group of winners. Since its launch in 2007, Ceylinco Life’s Family Savari promotion has benefitted more than 37,000 people from over 11,000 policyholder families across Sri Lanka, earning its place as the largest and most enduring loyalty-cum-rewards programme in the country’s life insurance sector.

Over the years, Family Savari winners have holidayed in destinations as diverse as Australia, Italy, England, Germany, Switzerland, Japan, France and Türkiye, as well as popular favourites like China, Dubai, Malaysia and Singapore. Adding to the fun, celebrity brand ambassadors Roshan Ranawana, his wife Kushlani and son Minneth join the winners on their journeys, making the Family Savari experience even more memorable.

Conducted without interruption for nearly two decades, Family Savari has become synonymous with shared family experiences, meaningful rewards and the celebration of long-standing customer relationships, a distinction further strengthened with the successful completion of its 19th edition.

Ceylinco Life has been the market leader in Sri Lanka’s life insurance industry for 21 consecutive years, offering innovative insurance solutions that protect and de-risk the ambitions of policyholders. In 2025, the Company was ranked the most valuable insurance brand in Sri Lanka and the 22nd most valuable brand overall by Brand Finance. It was also voted the People’s Life Insurance Service Provider of the Year for the 19th consecutive year in 2025, reaffirming its position as a brand trusted by millions.

Manoj Alexander: 25 years of harmonising music and social impact

ComBank and Hayleys Mobility redefine sustainable mobility with flexible leasing solutions

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.