Shah Rukh Khan – secret to looking young

I’m sure the whole of Sri Lanka is eagerly looking forward to the arrival of Bollywood heartthrob Shah Rukh Khan, due in Colombo, next month, for the grand opening of the City of Dreams.

What makes Shah Rukh Khan standout is not only his acting prowess but also his looks.

At 59-plus, he looks absolutely great … or, let’s say, simply awesome.

Generally, people in their late fifties, or even in their mid-fifties, look frail, and some can’t even walk steadily.

So, what is Shah Rukh Khan’s secret to looking young, and, remember, he will be hitting 60 on 2nd November, 2025!

Yes, diet, is given top priority where Shah Rukh Khan is concerned.

While many of us need around four meals a day, Shah Rukh focuses on two main meals a day – lunch and dinner – and avoids snacking or elaborate dishes.

His meals often include sprouts, grilled chicken, broccoli, and sometimes dhal. And don’t we all love dhal!

While he enjoys sharing meals with others when he’s with family or travelling, even if it means indulging in richer dishes, like biryani or parathas, his core diet remains consistent, he says.

Wonder what would be his menu during his very short stay in Sri Lanka! Perhaps traditional Indian foods like tandoori chicken and mutton biriyani, roti, parathas, food cooked with ghee! He also likes the drink lassi, I’m told.

Perhaps, we should also ask him to check out some of our dishes, as well … a good rice and curry menu, with dhal!

It isn’t diet alone that has given Shah Rukh his young look but, he says, exercise, too, has played an important part, especially where his physique is concerned.

Shah Rukh refers to his fitness journey during the pandemic, saying during the pandemic he decided to work hard on his body.

He focused on building a strong physique, and, by exercising consistently, he achieved a body he is proud of today.

Another factor responsible for his leaner, healthier body, and a sharper appearance, is that he has completely quit smoking

This major lifestyle change has also helped him maintain a leaner, healthier body, and a sharper appearance, he says.

Strangely, his sleep routine is totally different to what experts say. We are told that we need between seven and nine hours of sleep per night for optimal health.

Shah Rukh admits he has an unusual sleep schedule and this generally happens when he has a busy shooting schedule.

He usually goes to bed around 5.00 am and sleeps for about four–five hours. Even though it’s not ideal, he manages it around his busy shooting schedule.

In fact, Shah Rukh is a night person and usually loves working in the night. He also loves night shoots. He had said, “I usually head to bed around 5.00 am. On shooting days, I wake up by 9 or 10 in the morning. After coming back home late at night — sometimes around 2.00 am — I take a shower and get a workout in before I finally sleep.”

On the work front, he will be seen next in the movie ‘King’, due for a grand release in 2026.

Shah Rukh Khan continues to inspire millions with his commitment to fitness and I hope Sri Lankans will take a cue from this Bollywood heartthrob and maintain a leaner, healthier body.

Western proxy war in Ukraine could be approaching dangerous tipping point

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.