Union Assurance unveils ‘Suwamaga Mobile Screening Unit’ to combat diabetes in Sri Lanka

Union Assurance, Sri Lanka’s premier Life Insurer, continues to enrich community well-being through its flagship CSR programme, Suwamaga. Aligned with its brand purpose of protecting lives and enriching the well-being of all, the Company launched Suwamaga—a nationwide initiative to address the growing prevalence of diabetes in Sri Lanka.  This comprehensive programme is designed holistically to guide individuals toward better health outcomes with a focus on raising awareness about diabetes, promoting healthier lifestyles, supporting early detection and risk management and fostering community engagement.

As part of the programme, the Company unveiled its ‘Suwamaga Mobile Screening Unit’ on 27 November 2024 at Cinnamon Lakeside, with the attendance of the Ministry of Health and the Diabetes Association of Sri Lanka. The Suwamaga Mobile Screening Unit is a fully-equipped mobile truck designed to provide free diabetes screening conducted by certified healthcare professionals along with health reports and personalised guidance for participants in managing and mitigating health risks. The Mobile Screening Unit will travel across Sri Lanka, from urban hubs to rural regions, ensuring that access to free testing is available to individuals of all ages, regardless of whether they are Union Assurance customers or not, thereby enhancing public accessibility to healthcare services.

Chief Marketing Officer at Union Assurance Mahen Gunarathna, Chief Executive Officer at Union Assurance Senath Jayatilake and Vice President of the Diabetes Association of Sri Lanka Dhanya Wijesuriya

The Chief Executive Officer at Union Assurance, Senath Jayatilake, commented on the programme, stating, “Sri Lanka faces a diabetes crisis, with approximately one in ten adults living with the disease and many more undiagnosed or at risk. Early detection and timely intervention are crucial in managing diabetes and preventing severe complications. The Suwamaga programme, alongside the Mobile Screening Unit will provide the opportunity for individuals to check their health profiles and take proactive steps toward an empowered lifestyle. The programme comes at a critical time as the country continues to recover from economic challenges, ensuring that healthcare services remain accessible to all, particularly in underserved areas where access to medical services may be limited”.

“Union Assurance has always been close to the hearts and lives of people as an insurer who goes beyond the traditional practices to deliver our brand purpose of protecting lives and enriching the well-being of all. This is another one of our programmes to ensure that we combat some of the most pressing issues we commonly face, stepping forward as a responsible corporate citizen to provide nationwide support. Our commitment is to reach the multitudes and create awareness of one of the key silent killers prevalent in society today. We look forward to creating a positive impact and have long-term plans to better manage diabetes in Sri Lanka,” the Chief Marketing Officer at Union Assurance, Mahen Gunarathna noted.

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.