Falling oil prices and fallen heroes

The whole world is enjoying the benefits of the US-Iran peace deal. Vessel traffic has more than doubled via the Hormuz Strait over the past 36 hours or so, bringing oil prices down steeply, according to media reports. Predictions that oil prices would not return to the pre-conflict levels in the foreseeable future have gone wrong.

World oil prices have come down almost to the pre-Iran war levels, with the global benchmark Brent crude dropping below USD 72.48 a barrel, described as the price it was at the day before the launch of the US-Israel attacks on Iran on 28 Feb., and settling at USD 72.63 per barrel. The US benchmark West Texas Intermediate (WTI) fell below USD 70 per barrel. These are very positive signs. Oil price decreases have stood all economies in good stead.

Some countries, such as the US, Australia and Pakistan, have opted for partial pass-throughs causing pump prices to drop, much to the relief of consumers who were reeling from the inflated fuel costs for more than three months. They have managed to cool inflation to some extent. But Sri Lankans are not that lucky. At the time of going to press, the JVP-NPP government had not decided to lower fuel prices; it was only trotting out various excuses for the so-called lag phase while pressure was mounting on it to reduce fuel prices at least partially. Sri Lanka’s fuel pricing has shown a rockets-and-feathers pattern under successive governments.

The JVP-NPP government did not scruple to opt for an immediate asymmetric cost pass-through when world oil prices increased. It allegedly resorted to price gouging by revaluing oil inventories, procured at lower costs, at prevailing market prices. When the Iran war erupted in late February, the government declared that the country’s fuel stocks were sufficient for several months, but it increased fuel prices immediately afterwards in keeping with global oil price hikes. Thus, it gets the best of both worlds by making fuel prices cost-reflective only when world oil prices rise. It is continuing the policies of the SLPP-UNP government, which it condemned for exploiting the public.

During their opposition days, the JVP/NPP leaders claimed that a government that increased local fuel prices whenever world oil prices rose was not worth its salt; it was a simple task that even a Pettah trader was equal to, they argued. They are now doing exactly what they flayed the previous governments for.

The Opposition has accused the government of keeping fuel prices unconscionably high to recover the staggering losses caused by the coal procurement scam, which has made the diesel-fired power plants operate overtime to compensate for a generation loss at Norochcholai. The Ceylon Petroleum Corporation has admitted that it had to buy some diesel shipments at prices as high as USD 286 per barrel to prevent supply disruptions. What has driven the demand for diesel high is the country’s overdependence on diesel-fired power plants to avoid power cuts.

Meanwhile, private bus operators, who secure fare hikes whenever diesel prices increase significantly, have argued that the operational and regulatory framework involving them and the National Transport Commission does not require them to lower bus fares when diesel prices decrease. If so, the government ought to introduce new laws and regulations to ensure that bus fares reflect diesel price decreases to prevent asymmetric pricing, for fuel is a major cost input in the transport sector.

If the JVP/NPP leaders were in the Opposition today, they would take to the streets demanding fuel price reductions. While out of power, they promised to champion the cause of the poor and resist injustice with might and main, just like Robin Hood and his Merry Men, but once in power, they are accused of behaving like Prince John and Sheriff of Nottingham; they are increasing taxes and enforcing compliance ruthlessly, besides jacking up tariffs. Such a hero-to-villain transformation usually carries significant political costs. No wonder the government is reluctant to face the Provincial Council elections.

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.