90 pct of military-held land in Sri Lanka’s east already returned: official

ECONOMYNEXT — Some 90 percent of military-held land in Sri Lanka’s eastern province has been handed over to residents, State Minister of Pramitha Bandara Tennakoon told parliament.

Responding to a question raised by opposition Tamil National Alliance (TNA) parliamentarian Shanakiyan Rasamanickam, Tennakoon said on Wednesday January 24 that military camps are not limited to the country’s formerly war-torn northern and eastern provinces but are located in all provinces taking into account present and future security risks.

“In the eastern province, the tri forces owned 44,980 acres [of land]. Of this, 37,955 acres, over 90 percent, has been given back to residents of that area. The forces have only 7,379 acres under their control now. Of these, lands owned by private citizens amount to 37.84 acres, while state land amounts to 7,342 acres,” the state minister said.

“Of the land owned by private citizens, we will hand over eight acres this year,” he added.

Tennakoon asked that the land issue is not made about ethnicity.

“The army is not stationed just in the north and east. They’re stationed in the south, the west, the east, the north and in the central province. This is according to the army’s present defence strategy,” he said.

President Ranil Wickremesinghe said in December that land rights were to be granted to people affected by Sri Lanka’s 26-year civil war in the island nation’s northern and eastern provinces. He said these rights will be granted to members of Tamil, Muslim, and Sinhalese communities.

He said the government is actively working on addressing all unresolved issues of the war.

“Despite the conclusion of the war, unresolved matters persist before the Human Rights Commission in Geneva and we have taken necessary steps to address these issues,” Wickremesinghe said speaking at an event on December 27.

“Efforts are underway to rectify the displacement of some individuals by allowing settlement based on the 1985 map,” he said. (Colombo/Jan24/2024)