Migrant workers to get housing loans up to Rs.10m under ‘Ethera Diriya’ scheme

Colombo, Sep. 10 (Daily Mirror) - Sri Lankan migrant workers will be eligible to obtain housing loans ranging from Rs.500,000 to Rs.10 million under the new “Ethera Diriya” Migrant Workers Housing Loan Scheme introduced by the Sri Lanka Bureau of Foreign Employment (SLBFE).

The scheme was launched today (10) with the signing of Memoranda of Understanding (MoUs) between the SLBFE and two participating banks, DFCC Bank and Union Bank, in the presence of Foreign Affairs, Foreign Employment and Tourism Minister Vijitha Herath and Housing, Construction and Water Supply Minister Dr. Susil Ranasinghe.

The Bureau said MoUs would subsequently be signed with nine more banking institutions, bringing the total number of participating banks to 11.

Under the scheme, eligible migrant workers can obtain housing loans of between Rs.500,000 and Rs.10 million, with a maximum repayment period of 10 years.

A key feature of the scheme is that the SLBFE will reimburse a portion of the loan interest to the bank according to an approved reimbursement scheme. The Government has allocated Rs.126 million for this purpose in 2027.

The maximum interest rate considered under the scheme is 15% per annum. If a participating bank charges an interest rate exceeding 15%, the additional interest will have to be borne by the borrower.

Applicants must apply for the loan through a participating bank. The respective bank will independently assess the applicant's eligibility, repayment capacity, creditworthiness and collateral before deciding whether to approve or reject the loan.

Once a loan application is pre-approved, it will be forwarded to the SLBFE, which will verify the applicant's registration with the Bureau, foreign employment status, foreign remittances and eligibility for the scheme.

The participating banks will remain responsible for approving and disbursing the loans and recovering repayments, while the SLBFE will reimburse the eligible portion of the interest.

Banks are required to submit loan repayment confirmations, interest calculations and reimbursement claims to the SLBFE every six months.

Following verification, the relevant reimbursement amount will be credited to the respective loan accounts.

The SLBFE said the scheme was introduced to help migrant workers use income earned through foreign employment to build houses or meet other housing requirements.

Deputy Minister of Foreign Affairs and Foreign Employment Arun Hemachandra, SLBFE Chairman Kosala Wickramasinghe and other officials also attended the MoU signing ceremony.