Sri Lanka rupee depreciates in July amid $244mn current account surplus

ECONOMYNEXT – Sri Lanka has recorded an external current account surplus of 244.6 million US dollars in July 2025, up from 187.7 million dollars, official data showed, while the rupee depreciated from 299.9 to 302.2 to the US dollar in the same month.

From end December 2024 to when the external current account was in deficit (money was printed in the last quarter to target the single policy rate, but subsequently reversed), the rupee has depreciated from 292.58 to 302.21 to the US dollar.

The depreciation will push up the cost of living, allowing macro-economists to reach their inflation target, even if money is not printed by the central bank.

However, at the moment US monetary policy is better than before it was in March 2022 and global commodity prices are stable to falling, though Fed rate cuts are expected soon.

In Sri Lanka and elsewhere, macro-economists, harking back to Mercantilism, have claimed that current account deficits cause currency depreciation and not the flawed operating frameworks of badly anchored central banks which have got a monopoly in money production through legal tender laws.

Before the International Monetary Fund’s Second Amendment, state agencies that produced money for the people, including in Sri Lanka had a legal obligation to maintain external value of the currency, a covenant they fulfilled for centuries.

The obligation had been carried out very easily  by almost all central banks (except sometimes in wartime due to money printing) until the invention of open market operations by the Fed in the 1920s.

After the Second Amendment which came in the wake of the collapse of the Bretton Woods (due to Fed’s policy rate and swaps), there have been claims by macro-economists that the value of money is ‘market determined’.

Present day monetary authorities disclaim all responsibility to maintain the value of money as a store of value or a means of deferred payment, forcing people and governments to denominate contracts (such as debt) in foreign currencies which have stronger anchors and lower inflation targets.

“Macro-economists, through the policy rate, have arrogated for themselves the power to price-control interest rates against market forces,” says EN’s economic columnist Bellwether.

“The claim that exchange rates are market determined, and is not a consequence of the operating framework of a central bank, is immoral and is a key ruse through which they escape accountability for their inflationary policies and rate cuts.”

Inflation started to rocket in the 1980s in Sri Lanka and in Latin America due to the lack of a credible anchor for money after the IMF’s Second Amendment, even as the US came up with ways to better anchor floating rates.

The rupee is depreciating now mostly because of weaknesses in the central bank’s operating framework such as buying dollars in excess of the amount that is permitted by the deflationary policy it is running and the failure to defend the currency against existing excess liquidity in money markets for short periods, which undermines confidence.

RELATED : What is wrong with Sri Lanka’s flexible exchange rate

“This trick of escaping accountability, and blaming the public (imports/current account deficits) and politicians (budget deficits) was not devised in Sri Lanka, but by macroeconomists in the US and UK in particular, and filters to this country through papers written by Western academic inflationists, their textbooks and IMF technical assistance,” says Bellwether.

“All this goes against the commonweal, if we talk in terms of classical economists who always had the welfare of the people at heart and not the doctrine that the path to prosperity lay in inflationism and debasement.”

“Currency deprecation, or domestic inflation, denies sound money to people and usurps democracy by turning the public against elected governments or even monarchs.”

After deliberately firing permanent positive inflation to generate ’employment’ or ‘growth’ (potential output) in the 1960s in particular econometric macroeconomists then claimed that currencies were ‘overvalued’.

The IMF’s Second Amendment to its articles in 1978 set Sri Lanka’s central bank (and many others in developing countries and Sterling area fixed exchange rate countries that had joined the Bretton Woods,) adrift without a credible anchor after the Great Inflation.

As a result, countries like Sri Lanka had more inflation (and social unrest) after the Great Inflation period ended in the early 1980s.

When the US finally started to run credible monetary policy in the 1980s, the East Asian nations piggy backed on it (Singapore and Japan, Taiwan appreciated), becoming export powerhouses and avoided social unrest while other countries suffered Greater-than-Great inflation.

Latin American countries which had large foreign borrowings due to previous practices (and some deprecation even during the Bretton Woods) began to default in the 1980s.

Though claims have been made that the central bank only intervenes to ‘smooth out’ fluctuations in the forex market, it has now turned out that the agency has – an apparently de facto – obligation to provide dollars to the government to repay debt.

RELATED : Sri Lanka central bank makes over $750mn unsterilized forex sales to govt

In the first half of 2025 for example the central bank had provided over 750 million dollars to the government to repay debt (through unsterilized interventions) without any inflationary policy per se, except dollar rupee swaps.

“This further illustrates not just the immorality of market determined money, but also the lack of reason and clarity of thought that has been the hallmark of Mercantilism whether these doctrines were preached by anti-bullionists, the banking school or John Law and the Keynesians,” Bellwether says.

“Also there seems to be a big gap between what central bankers believe they are doing and what the actual operational framework is on the ground and its consequences on the credit system.”

The beliefs held by modern state-run central banks at higher levels of management and their ignorance of operating frameworks at ground level has sometimes been referred to as ‘white collar vs blue collar’ monetary policy, by classical style analysts.

Singapore’s Finance Minister Goh Keng Swee, who was chairman of the monetary authority and a classical economist, had a micro-knowledge of OFs and appreciated the currency in the 1970s and also in early 1980s against Great Inflation of US macro-economists.

Sri Lanka briefly attempted to ‘revalue’ the rupee on March 12, 1977 (from 8.72 to 7.28 to the US dollar) but gave it up and devalued later. At the time Sri Lanka had multiple exchange rates due to money printing (inflationary policy).

Since late 2022, the central bank under its current leadership had broadly maintained the external value of the rupee and also appreciated in 2023 using deflationary policy.

But there have been multiple warnings that inflation targeting is incompatible with the obligation of the central bank to collect foreign reserves under the IMF program (or provide dollars to the government as its banker as seen now) and ‘flexible’ inflation targeting is a discretionary non-system that drove a country at peace into default. (Colombo/Sept02/2025)