Misplaced prioritiesin public spending

The NPP government, led by the ‘Marxist’ JVP, continues to signal left and turn right. Having come to power promising to share in the suffering of the masses and travel in buses and trains, the NPP leaders have become embroiled in a vehicle tender controversy—a bid to procure as many as 1,775 4WD double-cab pickups for the MPs and state officials. They are seen moving about in state-owned luxury vehicles just as their predecessors did.

The Opposition has said that the pickups to be imported will cost the state coffers a staggering Rs. 42 billion. Some government politicians have sought to obfuscate the issue by claiming that those vehicles will be acquired on lease. Still, the public will have to pay through the nose for them. What one gathers from the ruling party politicians’ rhetoric is that the government is determined to go ahead with the questionable vehicle tender.

Before last year’s elections, the JVP/NPP leaders gave the public the impression that they would practise austerity and emulate Jose Mujica, who was the President of Uruguay from 2010 to 2015. Known as the world’s poorest President, Mujica, refused to move into the President’s House, and lived on a farm with his wife; his most notable asset was a 1987 Volkswagen Beetle. He donated his presidential salary and waited in queues with ordinary people in government hospitals, where he received treatment. He died a few months ago.

The JVP leaders have the same politico-military background as Mujica, who was a founding member of the Tupamaros National Liberation Movement, a leftist urban guerrilla group. As for government policies, the only similarity one sees between the Mujica administration and the NPP government is their lax attitude towards cannabis. Mujica legalised the recreational use of cannabis, and the JVP/NPP leaders have permitted the cultivation of cannabis for export.

It is believed that transport issues in the public sector in this country can be resolved without procuring more vehicles if the state-owned vehicle fleet is properly managed. The government claimed that hundreds, if not thousands, of vehicles, used by former government politicians and their appointees, had been returned following the 2024 regime change. They could have been reallocated to the state institutions facing vehicle shortages.

Funds set aside for new vehicles for politicians and state officials could be put to better use. Many state institutions are badly in need of resources. The Ceylon Teachers’ Union has said that more than 1,500 underprivileged schools have been earmarked for closure countrywide. The government can allocate enough funds for developing these poor schools, enabling them to attract more students. The SME sector is in deep crisis due to unpaid loans and the resultant parate executions. The government can grant the SME sector some relief. The SMEs play a pivotal role in developing a country. Farmers are up in arms, unable to dispose of or store their produce.

Why can’t the government utilise the funds it is planning to allocate for vehicle imports to build storage facilities? Many poor families have fallen prey to loan sharks in urban, rural and estate sectors. Microfinance companies are accused of exploiting their customers ruthlessly with impunity. Now that the government has claimed that the state coffers are overflowing, and it can afford to spend billions of rupees on new vehicles for politicians and officials, it ought to intervene to liberate the poor from the clutches of the heartless microfinance Shylocks. Universities are complaining of shortages of teachers and physical resources.

The government must allocate more funds for developing the state universities instead of buying new vehicles. State-run hospitals are facing shortages of drugs and equipment. Thousands of patients are wait-listed for surgeries. Billions of rupees to be spent on vehicles can be used to equip the state hospitals. (We are yet to see an NPP MP or Minister waiting in a queue at a government hospital for his or her turn, the way Mujica did!) The Sri Lanka Transport Board is in need of more buses. Why can’t the government allocate more funds for developing the state-owned bus service and Sri Lanka Railways?

It is high time the government set its expenditure priorities right.

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.