Celebrating 30 years … singing the blues

Multi-award winning Melbourne-based blues and soul singer/songwriter Andrea Marr, has been delivering high-energy blues and soul around Australia, for 30 years.

This extremely talented singer, from Sri Lanka, initially gained recognition singing in her dad Elmo Mulholland’s band, in the late ’90s, but a happening, one fateful night, changed her whole musical life.

Says Andrea: “In 1996, my husband, Lindsay, and some friends went along to the Waltzing Matilda hotel in Springvale, Australia, and my husband put my name on the board for the blues jam, and I was instantly taken under the wing of blues man Billy Kavanagh and taught the music of Etta James and Koko Taylor.”

Kavanagh recognised Andrea was a natural blues singer, the minute he heard her, and insisted on nurturing her blues career.

Three weeks later, Andrea was in her first blues band. She released her first album ‘Inheritance,’ the next year, and received airplay and great reviews.

Andrea has now released 10 albums, three of them made the charts – on the Australian blues charts and the US soul/blues and R&B charts – and has won many awards, as well.

She has represented Australian blues at the International Blues Challenge, in Memphis, Tennessee (an iconic cultural hub widely celebrated as the “Home of the Blues”), on three occasions, and, in 2025, sang at the Women in Blues showcase in Memphis.

Andrea was inducted into the Blues Music Victoria Hall of Fame, in 2022, and last year became the Ambassador for Women in Blues; this year she was elected onto the board of the US Women in Blues, becoming the Ambassador for Australian Women in Blues.

Andrea’s mission is to get the world to hear the great Aussie blues women and even the playing field for female blues artistes.

You can hear Andrea’s music on Spotify and all streaming platforms; Search for Andrea Marr or The McNaMarr Project.

The burden, and also strength, of the critical scholar in the Humanities

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.