Ring in the New Year…with nostalgia

This year’s 31st night scene is chock-a-block with dances, and New Year Eve revellers certainly have a wide and varied choice.

Yes, nothing helps us commemorate the end of a year like listening to music – whether you want to reflect, reminisce or have a good time.

However, some say they truly miss out on the songs that have the perfect lyrics to the lead up for that midnight countdown.

They even mentioned songs like ‘Pack Up Your Troubles,’ ‘You Are My Sunshine,’ ‘This Land Is Your Land,’ ‘Roll Out The Barrel,’ ‘She’ll Be Coming Round The Mountain, ‘Lets’ Twist Again,’ and, of course ‘ Auld Lang Syne.’

Kevin Almedia and X-IT at Mount Lavinia Hotel (L) / Lankika Perera: 31stnight in the UK (R)

With so many new outfits around, I’m quite sure their New Year’s Eve repertoire would not contain any of the mentioned nostalgic songs.

Not too long ago, I checked out The Breakaway Ball, with Sohan & The X-Periments and the group Mirage doing the needful, and it was so wonderful to see the crowd, on the floor, around 11.30 pm, dancing and singing these nostalgic songs, and going round in a circle, holding hands.

When the countdown began, the jolly crowd was a part of that countdown scene, as well, and immediately after 12 midnight, they were all greeting each other.

Some are wondering whether tonight the Baila would replace all those nostalgic scenes.

Rajiv Sebastian & The Clan at The Park StreetWarehouse to usher in 2025

Sohan & The X-Periments are still around and will be heating up the scene at the James Bond Gala Dinner Dance at the Cinnamon Lakeside, while Mirage will be doing their thing in The Seychelles, at the Lo Brizan pub and restaurant.

Also overseas for a 31st night engagement is the singing sensation of the Golden Chimes era, Lankika Perera.

She will be the guest star at a New Year’s Eve dance to be held in the UK.

Rajiv & The Clan will be at The Park Street Warehouse to usher in 2025

Says Rajiv: “Move your feet to the magical ’70s with Rajiv & The Clan who are loaded with three decades of experience for vintage music in both English and Sinhala, flanked by the sensational Ama Jayasinghe, plus DJ.”

The Mount Lavinia Hotel’s 31st night happening is ‘Moulin Rouge – Une Nuit à Paris,’ where you could celebrate the dawn of 2025 in true Parisian flair.

This year’s New Year’s Eve celebration, at the Mount, they say, comes with a breathtaking 30-minute fireworks display, with entertainment by Can-Can dancers, live music by the band X-IT, featuring Kevin Almeida, and DJ Kosala.

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.