President, US Envoy to Delhi discuss expanding economic ties

President Anura Kumara Dissanayake (right) with US Special Representative for South and Central Asia Sergio Gor

Meeting held in New Delhi on sidelines of India’s AI Impact Summit

President Dissanayake to address Summit today and hold bilateral meeting with Modi

United States Special Representative for South and Central Asia and Ambassador to India Sergio Gor yesterday met President Anura Kumara Dissanayake in New Delhi for talks centred on enhancing economic engagement between the United States and Sri Lanka.

In a post on X, the Ambassador said discussions focused on reinforcing commercial relations and promoting regional stability through closer cooperation. “Strong partnerships deliver real results for our countries,” he said, adding that the meeting explored avenues to further strengthen bilateral engagement.

Sri Lankan exports grew 5.6% to $ 17.2 billion in 2025 with the US accounting for 23% of the country’s merchandise exports, recording a 3.06% increase to $ 2,999.15 million. India comes second with exports increasing by 17.21% in 2025 to $ 1,035.72 million.

President Dissanayake is currently in India on an official visit and is attending India’s AI Impact Summit in New Delhi.

He is scheduled to attend a series of meetings from 18 to 20 February in parallel with the summit including a special dinner reception hosted yesterday by Prime Minister Modi for heads of state visiting New Delhi for the summit.

The AI Impact 2026 Summit, focused on advancing the responsible use of artificial intelligence for the benefit of humankind, is being held at the Bharat Mandapam Convention Hall in New Delhi with the participation of heads of state and representatives from the global technology sector.

President Dissanayake is due to address the summit today (19). He is also expected to hold a special meeting with Prime Minister Modi and engage in bilateral discussions with several other heads of state attending the summit.