A Queer Case: A journalist found murdered

When the journalist is found murdered on the Heath, near the house, Bigge realizes what has happened, a conclusion that the reader too might well have come to, except the rationale for what had happened continues obscure until the end. For there are fascinating twists with regard to the motive, and other twists with regard to the odd motivations of the other characters.

My visit to Australia last year was immensely productive, not only because it was the precursor to a cruise on the Pacific, but also because I was given several books by friends there. Apart from those Robert Scoble gave me, I got two thrillers for the cruise from Peter Rowe, who had been High Commissioner here at the turn of the century, and a very good friend since.

He gave me two very different thrillers for the cruise, both of which I managed to finish while on board. The first I read was A Queer Case by Robert Holtom, the first in a series still to be developed about a gay bank clerk, Selby Bigge, who spends much of his free time searching for sex, and also looking for a lover. The novel is set in the period soon after the First World War, when Bigge has to be constantly on the alert to avoid arrest.

The novel opens with him on Hampstead Heath, the haunt of gay adventurers in those days and I believe even now, along with someone who enjoyed casual sex with him but was not prepared for more, unlike Bigge. When their assignment has to be abandoned, he comes across an Oxford acquaintance whom he had once kissed on a bench there, though nothing further had developed. He feels this may be the lover he seeks, and is thrilled when Patrick tells him how much he hates his step-mother, who he thinks is a gold digger, and asks him to find out more about her.

Patrick invites him to the Ritz to meet his father, Sir Lionel Duker, and his second wife Lucinda. There is a scene there when they are confronted by a journalist who it seems hated Lucinda since she had originally married the man he was in love with. He had persecuted the pair until they were divorced, after which, the man having left the country, Lucinda married Sir Lionel.

Bigge visits the journalist, whom in his relentless search for sex he rather fancies, but the man rejects his advance, and does not seem especially knowledgeable about the gay world, which makes Bigge wonder. He then goes to the Duker mansion near Hampstead Heath, for Sir Lionel’s birthday party, and meets a strange collection of guests including a lady crime novelist who believes she is much better than Agatha Christie and her niece, a lesbian who turns out to be engaged to Patrick.

The journalist turns up after the ladies have left, and Sir Lionel has retired, as has a drunken colonel. Though the journalist is thrown out and flees into the night, Bigge after vainly pursuing him and getting back to the house finds Lucinda has been strangled. Patrick had been locked in the cloakroom, the key of which had vanished earlier in the evening.

The immediate assumption of the police who are called in, as well as everyone else, is that the journalist had slipped into the house and killed Lucinda, but this is not certain and Bigge feels the police have their suspicions about him, too, his nervousness increased by the knowledge that in pursuing their inquiries they will find out about his sexuality. His fear is exacerbated when they turn up at his lodgings; the pick up was with at the beginning of the novel had dropped in for a quickie, and had to hide in his bedroom. Holtom creates much suspense in this very odd situation, before the police finally leave.

When the journalist is found murdered on the Heath, near the house, Bigge realizes what has happened, a conclusion that the reader too might well have come to, except the rationale for what had happened continues obscure until the end. For there are fascinating twists with regard to the motive, and other twists with regard to the odd motivations of the other characters.

In the end, it is the lesbian fiancé who becomes Bigge’s good friend, not Patrick, who they both realize is riddled with guilt about his sexuality. I had thought she would become his amanuensis, but it seems that he acquires an aristocratic male sidekick for his second case, in a book that is due to be published soon.

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.