Bandaranaike Academy for Leadership and Public Policy dialogue on regulating online safety on 8 Feb

The Bandaranaike Academy for Leadership and Public Policy (BALPP) will host a thought-provoking policy dialogue on the critical topic of “Regulating Online Safety: Ethics, Practice, and Legal Norms” on 8 February from 3:30 p.m. to 5:30 p.m. at the BMICH in Colombo 7.

The Policy Dialogue, will be led by the students of the BALPP’s Cybersecurity Postgraduate Diploma course and Course Director Asela Waidyalankara. The event promises to delve deep into the multifaceted aspects of online safety and the controversial aspects of the recently passed Online Safety Bill.

The distinguished panelists include: Colombo University Emeritus Prof of Law and former Vice Chancellor Prof Savitri Gunasekera and The Disinformation Project New Zealand Research Director and Groundviews, Sri Lanka’s first and award-winning civic media website Founding Editor  Dr. Sanjana Hattotuwa.

The discussion moderated by Prof. Arjuna Parakrama aims to address the evolving landscape of online safety and the challenges associated with regulating ethical practices and legal norms in the digital realm. The BALPP recognises the significance of fostering an open dialogue on these critical issues and is delighted to bring together leading experts to share their insights.

The event, useful for members of the media, academia, industry professionals, and the public, are invited to attend this free discussion. Register for free by contacting 071 231 0655  (Daham/External Relations Officer- BALPP) The BALPP encourages active participation and hopes to create awareness on the importance of online safety and it’s ethical and legal considerations, in today’s interconnected world.

The BALPP is an independent institution housed within the Bandaranaike Memorial International Conference Hall (BMICH). It offers premium education on leadership and Public Policy while conducting research, outreach and advocacy to suit the nation’s and region’s needs.