Largest ever housing and construction expo kicks off at BMICH

From left: Urban Development and Housing Ministry Secretary W.S. Sathyananda, Embassy of China 2nd Secretary Wang Jian, CIDA Chairman Eng. R.H. Ruvinis, and CCISL President Jayantha Perera opening the Build Sri Lanka Housing and Construction Expo 2024 at the BMICH yesterday.

The premier three-day Build Sri Lanka Housing and Construction International Expo organised by the Chamber of Construction Industry (CCI) kicked off yesterday at the BMICH.

Build Sri Lanka 2024 showcases the latest developments in the building and construction industry, with eminent industry experts, stakeholders and decision makers in attendance, making it an ideal event to source new products, network and usher in new contacts and business opportunities.  Over 50,000 trade visitors are expected over the course of the event, looking to source the latest, inventive products on offer, not accessible otherwise in the local market, in addition to new product launches.

This exhibition features many stalls of companies from several countries making it a truly international exhibition showcasing building and construction materials; interior décor, furniture tools and equipment; construction consultancy services; construction machinery and industrial vehicles; sustainable construction and green building; China trade pavilion; tri services displays and SME pavilion.

A special feature that drew attention to visitors to the exhibition will be a ‘Dedicated China trade pavilion showcasing products of companies from China. Another attraction is the displays of the tri services of their research and development activities.

The exhibition is supported by following companies: Colonial Engineering – Main Sponsor; PowerTech Cement – Strategic Sponsor; Rhino Roofing Products Ltd. – Platinum Sponsor; Alumex PLC – Platinum Sponsor; Confab Steel Ltd., – Platinum Sponsor; Nippon Paint Lanka Ltd. – Platinum Sponsor; Phoenix Industries Ltd. – Gold Sponsor; Hiru Marbel and Granite - Gold Sponsor; Wurth Lanka Ltd. – Gold Sponsor and Hayleys Fentons Ltd.  – Gold Sponsor.