Sri Lanka, Israel sign deals for more workers to feed war machine

ECONOMYNEXT – Sri Lanka’s Minister of Labour and Foreign Employment Manusha Nanayakkara has said he signed several agreements for the employment of Sri Lankan workers in the warring state of Israel.

“Anyone can register to go to Israel,” Nanayakkara, who is currently on a state visit to Israel, said amid the wailing of sirens in a video posted on social media.

“We came to Israel to send workers to Israel and to check the condition of the workers living there.”

The minister said governments of both countries were able to reach an agreement regarding the ‘many’ employment opportunities available to Sri Lankan workers for vacancies in the fields of nursing, hotels, restaurants, construction and infrastructure in Israel.

Israel, funded mainly by the USA, is currently involved in a war it claims is against Palestinian group Hamas, but what the International Court of Justice (ICJ) has determined is plausibly genocidal.

International and social media are full of videos of the indiscriminate killing of Palestinians by Israel’s occupying force. The UN has said Israeli restrictions on Gaza food aid may constitute a war crime.

Minister Nanayakkara though was full of glee at the ‘opportunities’ for Sri Lankan workers to contribute to Israel’s shrinking economy amidst the war.

“We had the opportunity to meet and discuss with five ministers, including the Minister of Interior, the Minister of Construction, the Minister of Transport, the Minister of Labor and the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, who are responsible for ‘PIBA’ in Israel.

Israel’s Population, Immigration, and Border Authority (PIBA) deals with the regulation of the legal status of citizens, residents, and foreigners and enforce laws regarding the residence and employment of foreigners.

“In the discussion with the Minister of Labour, we discussed about Sri Lankan workers, workers’ safety, work activities and salaries. We were able to speed up the dispatch of nurses. Also, only one test has been conducted for jobs in the construction sector. We will be able to conduct another test in May.

“There is a shortage of workers for all jobs in the hotel sector and restaurants. We were able to make agreements between the two parties to send our workers for all those vacancies and we were also able to make the necessary provisions and arrangements to send a certain number of women to the agriculture sector.

“In addition, in the construction sector, there are vacancies in the field of road carpeting and other infrastructure development.”

Israel and America are currently clearing the rubble of bombed Gaza to build a port and road.

Military conscription is mandatory for Israelis leaving the state with an acute worker shortage. Sri Lanka’s Minister of Ports, Shipping and Aviation Nimal Siripala de Silva told parliament last month that Israel was offering salaries of 800,000 to a million for workers, after he signed an agreement for direct flights to ‘expedite workers going to Israel’. (Colombo/Mar22/2024)