Reducing big power rivalries should be top priority in 2025

At present big power tensions are working out mainly at the level of rhetoric but if the international community fails to reduce these antagonisms substantially, going forward, there is every possibility of rhetoric giving way to ground-level military confrontations. Of course, it will be in no-one’s interest if the latter development occurs.

There is a tendency on the part of publics and polities to view the international community and the UN system as synonymous but this is a somewhat limited perspective. Among more reflective sections, the phrase, ‘international community’, while meaning mainly the UN system, also refers to all those parties that have a stake in the world’s wellbeing and are actively promoting it, such as peace campaigners and people-centred organizations. Accordingly, international peace-building in the substantive sense refers to a globe-wide collective effort.

However, world peace-building devolves on mainly the UN and one of the most discouraging features of our times is the seeming impotence of the UN in the face of increasing big power tensions. Accordingly, rendering the UN effective and result-oriented becomes a task for all sections that value peace. Reforming and broad-basing the UN is integral to the latter process and should receive equal weightage.

Unfortunately, among those actors that are tending to disregard the UN and its authority are quite a few of the world’s foremost powers and their supporters. But ‘the hour is late’, and unless all sections of the world community give the UN the position and esteem due to it, it would be only a matter of time before the current threatening rhetoric mouthed by some major states translates into actual military confrontations. Thus, increasing the effectiveness of the UN becomes a foremost challenge of our times.

Given the seeming helplessness of the UN and increasing global cleavages along military, political and economic lines, it could be said that the current international political situation has many things in common with the international power rivalries at the beginning of the 20th century which degenerated into World War 1. Then as well as now, dangerous and emotional rhetoric among the foremost powers was rampant before a ‘tragedy of miscalculations’ by the rival power blocs gave way to a devastating war.

The contemporary world could very well be nearing such a World War 1-type flashpoint unless rationality prevails among the major powers and value-based politics are made to replace realpolitik. The big powers could begin by curbing their threatening rhetoric.

Right now, the Ukraine remains one of the most dangerous war zones and could do with stepped-down inter-power rhetoric. Russia, for example, has warned the US and NATO of a ‘decisive response’, including ‘military-technical counter-measures’, if the latter players continue to ‘make new missile threats’ against Russia.

The Ukraine situation calls for renewed peace efforts and the US could lead from the front, if it is serious about a political solution, in initiating a dialogue among all the relevant sections to de-escalate the wasting conflict in the East European country, whose sovereignty needs to be respected by Russia.

But misconceptions are abounding among the relevant external powers. Powerful sections in Russia are seeing the continuous arming of the Ukraine with lethal, sophisticated weaponry by the West, as in some way posing a threat to it and its perceived spheres of influence. It will be in the interests of Russia and the West to iron out their differences on this score at the negotiating table. Apparently, the term ‘sovereignty’ itself needs to be discussed by the sides and a common understanding on it arrived at. There is, apparently, a need to get back to basics.

However, as matters stand, it ought to be plain to see that a country’s territorial integrity could in no way be violated by another, for whatever reason. Meanwhile, the US and NATO would do well to take cognizance of the grave dangers growing out of the present international situation and seriously explore the possibility of cutting down on the supply of exceptionally lethal weaponry to the Ukraine. This could lead to a more constructive dialogue between the US and Russia on the Ukraine question.

It needs to be factored in that the patience of Russia’s rulers could shrink and that such a mindset could lead to the perpetration of blunders that could bring about a full-scale regional war. Hopefully, ‘Jaw, Jaw, Jaw’ would indeed be seen as preferable to ‘War, War, War’.

The next theatre of war that needs urgent defusing is the Middle East. Here’s one war zone that reflects most glaringly the world’s current power cleavages that could take the Middle East close to a full-blown regional war. Once again, states’ rhetoric is not making the peace maker’s task any easier.

Recently, for instance, China and Iran said, among other things, that the ‘Middle East is not a battleground for the big powers’. There is no denying this but the observation applies with equal importance to the rest of the world’s war and conflict zones as well.

Ideally, the major powers of the East and West need to disentangle themselves from these theatres of wasting conflict. The US, for example, cannot afford to forget this truth considering that its most recent military interventions in the South have proved disastrous and counter-productive for it.

Besides, the US needs to bring increasing pressure on Israel to step-back from the path of war and bloodshed and enter into a dialogue with the Palestinian side. As a first step, the US could reduce the fire-power of Israel, which is playing a major role in perpetuating the Middle East conflict.

Replacing the dangerous rhetoric of war by more conciliatory pronouncements by both major parties to the Middle East blood-letting, could have the effect of paving the way for a peace-oriented opinion climate in the Middle East.

Meanwhile, major powers of the South, such as China, could give peace a chance in the Middle East by impressing upon Iran and other major regional actors, the importance of getting on to a more reconciliatory policy path.

Right now, while it is true that Israel is showing every sign of persisting in its war effort, disregarding reason in the process, pro-war and divisive pronouncements by its adversaries are in no way proving helpful either. It ought to be plain to see by all concerned that increasingly the language of peace and reconciliation needs to replace the rhetoric of war and butchery.

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.