HNB General Insurance becomes the only General Insurer named among Sri Lanka’s 50 Best Workplaces™ 2026 by Great PlaceTo Work®

HNB General Insurance (HNBGI) has become the only General Insurance company to make it to the exclusive list of 50 Best Workplaces™ in Sri Lanka for 2026. Compiled by Great Place To Work®, the renowned global authority on workplace culture, the prestigious list features 50 Sri Lankan organizations across all sizes, with HNB General Insurance ranking 16th in the “Large Sized Workplaces (>500 Employees)” segment.

This recognition is based on comprehensive, confidential survey data assessing employee experiences of trust, innovation by all, meaningful organizational values, and leadership effectiveness. Organizations were rigorously evaluated on how well they create a “For All™” workplace experience, where every single employee is welcomed, supported, and engaged.

A workplace culture rooted in trust, belonging, and shared purpose is just one reason employees love working at HNB General Insurance, according to research and consulting firm, Great Place To Work®.

According to Great Place To Work®, “A best workplace is one in which employees, no matter who they are and what they do for the organization, are having a consistently positive experience of a ‘Great Place To Work For All™’. It is an honor for HNB General Insurance to be recognized by their employees as an organization that fosters a foundation of trust and meaningful values through effective leaders.”

The credential is backed by exceptional data from the anonymous survey, where an outstanding 95% of participating HNBGI employees expressed an extremely high view of the company’s workplace culture. This remarkably high score is particularly noteworthy within the ‘Large Sized Workplaces’ category, where maintaining consistent engagement across a vast workforce presents unique structural challenges.

Mr. Sithumina Jayasundara, Executive Director/CEO – HNB General Insurance, shared his thoughts on the milestone, stating, “Transitioning from being Certified™ last year to becoming the only general insurance company to be recognized among Sri Lanka’s 50 Best Workplaces™ this year makes this achievement even more meaningful and reinforces our commitment to building a workplace where our people can thrive.

Finch Foods showcases the finest of Sri Lanka at Bandaranaike International Airport

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.