DSL strengthens Board with key appointments as company marks 40 years of excellence

Fresh from celebrating its milestone 40th Anniversary, Douglas and Sons Ltd. (DSL) has announced the appointment of Manjula Sirimane and Yudhishtran (Yudy) Kanagasabai as Independent Non-Executive Directors to its Board of Directors, effective 2 July 2026.

These appointments reflect the company’s continued commitment to strengthening corporate governance, enhancing strategic oversight and positioning the business for sustainable long-term growth as it enters its fifth decade primarily in the automotive aftermarket industry.

Sirimane, Senior Partner of D. L. & F. De Saram, brings over 30 years of legal experience with extensive expertise in corporate and commercial law, regulatory advisory, data privacy and technology law, private client advisory, and corporate governance. Her background will provide valuable guidance in strengthening the Company’s governance framework and supporting its legal and compliance responsibilities.

Kanagasabai, former Chief Executive Officer of PricewaterhouseCoopers (PWC),  brings more than 36 years of experience in finance, accounting, corporate governance, audit, risk management and strategic leadership. A respected finance professional, his extensive knowledge of financial oversight, governance and audit practices will further reinforce the Company’s commitment to transparency, accountability, and sound business practices. He will also serve as Chairman of the Board Audit Committee.

Commenting on the appointments, DSL Chairman/Managing Director Saroj Perera said: “As Douglas and Sons embarks on its next chapter following our 40th anniversary, we are delighted to welcome Manjula Sirimane and Yudhishtran Kanagasabai to our Board. Their exceptional professional expertise, independence and strategic insight will strengthen our governance and support the Company’s continued growth. Their appointments reflect our commitment to maintaining the highest standards of leadership as we build on four decades of success.”

The Board is confident that the diverse experience and independent perspectives of both directors will contribute significantly to the Company’s strategic direction, governance and long-term value creation for all stakeholders whilst maintaining its leadership position earned to date.

Founded over 40 years ago, DSL has established itself as a trusted and respected name in Sri Lanka, built on a legacy of quality, integrity and customer commitment. As the company celebrates this significant milestone, it remains focused on innovation, strong corporate governance and sustainable growth while continuing to serve its customers and partners with excellence.