New Cooperatives Act to strengthen movement and protect public funds

Colombo, Aug. 17 (Daily Mirror) - A new Cooperatives Act aimed at strengthening the cooperative movement, closing legal loopholes and protecting the funds deposited by the public is expected to be introduced soon.A special two-day workshop with representatives from all Provincial Councils, aimed at preparing the new legislation, commenced in Colombo.

Speaking at the opening session, Minister of Trade, Commerce, Food Security and Cooperative Development Wasantha Samarasinghe said the existing Cooperatives Act contains legal shortcomings that need to be addressed to build a stronger and more transparent cooperative movement.

He said the new Act would seek to prevent fraud and other illegal activities carried out by exploiting loopholes in the existing law, while strengthening legal safeguards for money deposited by the public in cooperative institutions.

A concept paper for the new legislation has already been prepared. The workshop is aimed at developing the draft law by incorporating the experiences and recommendations of Provincial Governors, Cooperative Commissioners and other relevant officials.

Minister Samarasinghe said the Government's objective is to create an environment in which cooperative societies, cooperative banks and other cooperative activities can operate more efficiently while restoring and protecting public confidence in the movement.

"We have been discussing this for a considerable time and have now reached a crucial moment. Our aim is to formulate a new cooperative law and build the cooperative movement as a strong pillar," he said.

The Minister highlighted that stronger laws were necessary to prevent individuals from exploiting weaknesses in the existing system.

"People who have trusted cooperatives and deposited their money should not only have that trust protected, but should also be assured of the safety of their money. We must be accountable for that," he said.

Deputy Ministers R.M. Jayawardena and Upali Samarasinghe, Ministry Secretary K.A. Wimalenthirarajah, Provincial Governors, Provincial Cooperative Secretaries, Provincial Commissioners and other cooperative officials attended the workshop.