Trump reined in

President Donald Trump is full of himself as he enjoys unified Republican control of the US federal government. He exercises control over the White House and both chambers of the Congress. The composition of the current US Supreme Court (SC) with its conservative majority is also considered favourable to Trump; the apex court is widely viewed as being receptive to his constitutional arguments. Nevertheless, executive powers are far from untrammelled thanks to the robust US Constitution, which helps keep Trump reminded that the US democracy is stronger than he, and he has to be mindful of the separation of powers and act within constitutionally stipulated limits.

Trump’s immigration agenda suffered a huge setback yesterday. In a split decision, the SC has ruled that babies born in the US have a constitutional right to citizenship. This ruling has effectively put paid to Trump’s effort to end a 150-year-old citizenship policy amidst protests. The SC has upheld some of the current crucial immigration policies and helped strengthen Trump’s executive power, but in the present instance, it has stated categorically that all children born in the US “to parents unlawfully or temporarily present are citizens at birth under the 14th Amendment”. Trump and his team took great pains to convince the SC that children of undocumented immigrants and some temporary visitors were not subjected to the jurisdiction of the aforesaid amendment and therefore were not eligible for birthright citizenship. But the court was convinced otherwise.

The birthright citizenship ruling has come close on the heels of an SC judgement that sent the Trump administration reeling. Three days ago, in a ruling seen as affirming the Federal Reserve’s independence, the US SC foiled President Trump’s attempt to sack Lisa Cook, a governor of the US central bank. In a majority decision, the SC held that the Trump administration had not followed due process, which would have allowed Cook to contest her removal. The case will be sent back to lower courts, and the burden is now on the Trump administration to prove its allegation that Cook committed a mortgage fraud. She has vehemently denied the allegation. Trump has drawn heavy criticism for trying to exert greater control over the US central bank.

The US apex court has given several judgements against the Trump administration during the past several months. It has held that the International Emergency Economic Powers Act does not authorise the President to impose sweeping tariffs unilaterally. The ruling has invalidated numerous tariffs imposed by Trump, much to the resentment of the White House. The SC has also upheld a Mississippi law that provides for counting ballots that arrive after election day if they are posted on time. Trump and his fellow Republicans did their best to have that grace period removed, but in vain. In another bold decision, the SC ordered the Trump administration to ensure the return of a man who had been mistakenly deported to El Salvador. Trump’s efforts to deploy the National Guard despite objections raised by local and state officials were also foiled by the SC by upholding a lower court’s ruling.

President Trump has also failed to keep the Congress under his thumb. The House of Representatives and the Senate have passed a vital war powers resolution, directing Trump to withdraw US armed forces from hostilities in or against Iran. They have effectively curbed Trump’s military authority and made it mandatory for him to obtain congressional approval for such military campaigns.

Not that all decisions by the US judiciary and the Congress are flawless and welcome. According to legal experts, there have been several key SC decisions that enabled Trump to expand his executive power. The SC has loosened campaign finance restrictions, and this will benefit Republicans, whose election war chest is bulging while Democrats are reportedly in debt. US midterm elections are due in November 2026.

However, the US judiciary and the Congress assert their power and strengthen checks and balances to ensure that the Constitution takes precedence over politics, and the Executive acts with restraint. This is worthy of emulation for countries where executive power is virtually unrestrained, and the Heads of States act in a way that reduces legislators, including senior university professors, to the level of kindergarten children while making accurate predictions about judgements in high-profile cases and keeping key judicial positions vacant for political reasons, with impunity.

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.