NDB Kotahena branch sets a new benchmark with record-breaking CEO’s Club achievement

NDB Bank proudly celebrates the exceptional performance of its Kotahena Branch, which has achieved a monumental milestone in the bank’s history. The branch has become the first in NDB’s history to produce an unprecedented all 12 branch staff members qualify for the elite CEO’s Club members in a single year 2024 with a remarkable YTD achievement of Rs.37 million, cementing its position as the highest performer across the entire network.

This historic achievement is a testament to the Kotahena Branch team’s relentless dedication, exceptional teamwork, and commitment to delivering customer-centric solutions. By placing the needs of customers at the forefront, the team has demonstrated the true spirit of excellence that NDB strives for.

NDB Bank’s CEO’s Club, a hallmark of bancassurance excellence, has grown exponentially since the partnership with AIA Insurance began in 2006. As a pioneer in integrating banking and insurance services, NDB has consistently enhanced its suite of bancassurance solutions to provide comprehensive financial security for its customers. In 2023, the bank recorded a landmark achievement with 210 CEO’s Club members, showcasing the growing importance of bancassurance in NDB’s customer-focused offerings.

The 12 exemplary staff members who contributed to this outstanding achievement were Balasubramaniam Aingaran – Branch Manager, Shivanthan Jayaranjit – Privilege Relationship Manager, Jeyasekaram Kuganthan – Assistant Manager, Gagan Hiniduma – Credit officer, Navodya Nagodavithana – Credit Associate, Chamara Udayanga – Pawning officer, Sharmin James – Cash Officer. Amirthalingam Kirushikan – Previous cash officer, Mohammed Nafeel – Junior Executive, Nishan Madushanka Leonard – Senior Business Development Associate, Nidhursha Yogaraj – Banking Assistant and Sesadi Jeyasekara – Banking Assistant.

The George Keyt Foundation unveils a distinguished line-up of Sri Lankan artists for upcoming auction conducted by Sotheby’s

Plans to boost foreign reserves to US$ 10 billion in 2025 trigger bull-run at bourse

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.