IMF, Sri Lanka agree on continuing “hard-won” gains, int’l lender says

ECONOMYNEXT — The International Monetary Fund (IMF) has said it is encouraged by the new government’s commitment to continue Sri Lanka’s reform efforts and that agreement was reached on continuing to build on the “hard-won” gains.

The IMF said in a statement on Friday October 04 that initial talks between an IMF team led by Director for the Asia Pacific Department Krishna Srinivasan with newly elected President Anura Kumara Dissanayake were productive.

The team met with President Dissanayake, Prime Minister Harini Amarasuriya, Foreign Minister Vijitha Herath, Central Ban Governor Nandalal Weerasinghe and Secretary to the Treasury Mahinda Siriwardena and other stakeholders.

“We held productive discussions with President Dissanayake and Sri Lanka’s economic team on the economic and financial challenges facing the Sri Lankan economy. We agreed on the importance of continuing to safeguard and build on the hard-won gains that have helped put Sri Lanka on a path to economic recovery since entering one of its worst economic crises in 2022,” the IMF statement quoted Srinivasan as saying.

“We are encouraged by the authorities’ commitment to continue the reform efforts. The IMF remains a steadfast partner in supporting Sri Lanka and its people and stands ready to assist the country achieve its economic reform goals. The IMF team will continue its close engagement with Sri Lanka’s economic team to set a date for the third review of the IMF-supported programme,” he said.

In his meeting with the IMF delegation, President Dissanayake had said he aims to achieve the objectives of the programme in partnership with the IMF, seeking alternative approaches that will alleviate the burden on the citizens, according to a statement from the president’s media division (PMD).

“The required cordial and good environment was built between the two sides and the three days of talks concluded successfully,” the PMD statement said. (Colombo/Oct04/2024)