Environmental impact of candles and how best to get rid of wax

Candles create a warm and inviting ambience, but improper disposal of their remnants can harm the environment.

Most candles are made from paraffin, stearin – a fat-based wax – or natural alternatives such as beeswax and soy wax, which is made from soy beans.

Paraffin is a by-product of the petroleum industry, while stearin is often derived from palm oil, which is sourced from environmentally damaging monocultures, says Janine Korduan from the German Federation for the Environment and Nature Conservation (BUND).

“Candle remnants in the environment have a particularly negative impact when they are made from paraffin, as this, unlike other raw materials, is not biodegradable and can contain harmful chemicals,” Korduan says.

Such substances can enter water systems as tiny particles or chemical residues, harming animals and plants and eventually returning to the food chain.

Beeswax is a more environmentally friendly choice, as it is biodegradable and does not rely on fossil resources. Soy wax is also a good alternative, although its sustainability depends on its source.

“Candle remnants produce CO2 when burned, for example, if disposed of in general waste, as they then end up in an incineration plant,” Korduan says. But depending on where you live, there may be waste collection points or organisations that will repurpose your wax leftovers to make new candles.

True recycling of candle wax through waste collection is largely not viable, however, leaving collection points or reuse at home as the only options, Korduan says.

For anyone who wants to make the most of their leftovers, you can use old candle remnants to create new ones by melting the remnants in a water bath and then pouring the wax into a mould with some string. Alternatively, you can repurpose wax to make garden torches or firelighters – a creative way to use leftovers.

When buying candles, there are also things to consider: “Buy high-quality candles and avoid overly thick ones, as the ratio of wick to candle thickness determines whether remnants are left behind.”

She also notes that the placement of candles matters, as draughty areas mean candles tend to burn unevenly, leaving more residue. – dpa

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.