Markspen Holdings opens “Smart Hub” in Kurunegala

From left: Directress Dinali Galanga,General Manager Duleep Gunasekera, Directress Sigithi Galanga, Chairman Amil Galanga, Director Suresh Galanga

In an effort to bring superior quality products and services to consumers under one roof, the sole importer and distributor of the DOMA CTP20 automatic rice mill, Markspen Holdings Ltd. recently opened doors to its brand-new showroom in Kurunegala.

The state-of-the-art “Smart Hub” is located at No.389 Bamunuwela, Kurunegala. The new smart hub embodies the theme “We design your future” and ensures that customers get superior quality products and services.

The opening ceremony took place under the patronage of Markspen Group Chairman Amil Galanga. Directors Suresh Galanga and Dinali Galanga, Group General Manager Duleep Gunasekera, and members of staff were also present.

Speaking at the opening ceremony Markspen Group Chairman Amil Galanga explained in brief the products and services that will be accessible to customers at the new showroom. “This latest hub will display a range of high-tech products like the automatic rice mill, paddy drying machines, rice sorting machines, and even coconut oil distilling machines among others. We also have a range of products that are essential for the agriculture industry in our portfolio. Not only will the showroom assist with assembling these machines, we will also be providing after-sales services to all our loyal customers as well,” he said.

Markspen Holdings originally began operations as Markspen Labels Ltd. and was responsible for the import of machinery required for manufacturing companies, specifically equipment that would streamline and automate the manufacturing process. For instance, its product range includes TSC barcode printers, barcode scanners, POS terminals, barcode labels, printing ribbons, and many more.

The company has also created a significant presence in the solar power industry. Working in partnership with Growatt Solar Lanka Ltd., they supply solar panels, Growatt inverters, Growatt EV Chargers and accessories, giving integrated solutions for domestic, commercial and industrial systems with assembling and management of solar systems, and provide 24/7 after-sales services island-wide.

Additionally, Markspen Agro has 15 outlets spread across the island that stock superior quality products like heirloom rice, cashews, and authentic Sri Lankan spices.

Furthermore, another subsidiary of the Markspen Group is Markspen Logistics which provides transportation solutions for the tourism industry. They also provide delivery services to customers who purchase machinery and equipment from Growatt Solar Lanka Ltd.Markspen Labels, and Markspen Agro.

The company aims to take Sri Lanka and its economy forward through innovative products that enable businesses to be more efficient and profitable.