‘ComBank Digital’ links Dept. of Commerce for online payments with LankaPay

The Commercial Bank of Ceylon has announced the integration of the Department of Commerce (DOC) with ‘ComBank Digital’ enabling online payments for services via LankaPay.

As a result, businesses or individuals can now make secure real-time online payments for services such as registration of exporters, issuance of certificates of origin and other facilities offered by the Department of Commerce.

The online payment option can be accessed on www.combankdigital.com and its iOS, Android or Huawei mobile applications. The platform is secured with industry-level security standards to provide a convenient, swift and safe digital banking experience to users wherever they are, the Bank said.

Customers simply have to login to the platform and select the ‘Bill payment’ section on the platform, select ‘Department of Commerce’ and make their payments. Once a payment has been successfully completed, the customer can download a cyber-receipt as payment confirmation.

As this is a paperless process that does not require customers to visit a bank branch or the Department of Commerce office, it further contributes to the sustainability initiatives of the Bank and enables customers to be more environment-friendly, the Bank said.

“The addition of the Department of Commerce to the ComBank Digital platform is just one step in our roadmap of updates and features, which are designed to offer seamless and personalised banking experiences for our Retail, SME and Corporate customers,” Commercial Bank’s Assistant General Manager – Digital Banking Mr Pradeep Banduwansa said. “With more than a million users already on the platform, these updates can make a very tangible contribution not only in terms of convenience but in encouraging pro-planet practices.”

ComBank Digital already enables payments to government authorities such as the Import and Export Control Department (IECD), the Inland Revenue Department (IRD), Sri Lanka Ports Authority (SLPA) for cargo, vessel, and entry permit payments, Sri Lanka Customs, Employees Provident Fund (EPF), Employees Trust Fund (ETF), Board of Investment of Sri Lanka (BOI), and the Sri Lanka Standards Institution (SLSI). These payments are routed through the LankaPay Online Payment Platform (LPPOP).

ComBank Digital is known as one of the top five financial apps in use in Sri Lanka, and was launched in 2020. The app has undergone numerous enhancements, and is now enabled for the Bank’s business clientele too. Positioned as Commercial Bank’s single omni-channel digital banking platform, it is powered by Fiserv, the US-based global provider of financial services technology.

Commercial Bank is the largest private sector bank in Sri Lanka and the first Sri Lankan bank to be listed among the Top 1000 Banks of the World. The Bank operates a strategically-located network of branches and 964 automated machines in Sri Lanka, is the largest lender to Sri Lanka’s SME sector, and is a leader in digital innovation in the country’s Banking sector. Commercial Bank has the widest international footprint among Sri Lankan Banks, with 20 outlets in Bangladesh, a Microfinance company in Nay Pyi Taw, Myanmar, and a fully-fledged Tier I Bank with a majority stake in the Maldives.

Hunas Holdings and BCC Corporation Japan forge strategic partnership to revolutionize hospitality industry

Launch of ‘Worky’ – A Revolutionary Platform Transforming Sri Lanka’s Job Market

‘ComBank Digital’ adjudged ‘Best Mobile Banking App’ in Sri Lanka by Global Finance

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.