CBL Global Foods and USAID join forces to transform coconut industry in Sri Lanka

CBL Global Foods Limited (CBL GFL), a key player in Sri Lanka’s agribusiness sector and a subsidiary of the CBL Group – one of the largest food conglomerates, has partnered with the United States Agency for International Development (USAID) to enhance the coconut industry through an initiative aimed at boosting productivity and market access for small and medium-scale farmers. Supported USAID’s CATALYZE Private Sector Development (PSD) Food Solutions initiative, this partnership introduces advanced farming techniques to address productivity challenges that have long hindered the industry.

In an event held in Anuradhapura recently, CBL Global Foods signed a purchasing agreement with Rajarata Coconut Farmers’ Company Limited. Under this agreement, CBL Global Foods will source coconuts directly from farmers in Rajanganaya, Anuradhapura. Dennis Wesner, USAID/Sri Lanka and the Maldives’ Economic Growth Deputy Office Director and Randeewa Malalasooriya, Chief Executive Officer of CBL Global Foods attended the ceremony. CBL Global will enter into purchasing agreements with farmer companies in four other locations in Sri Lanka.

Sri Lanka’s coconut industry faces a critical production gap, yielding only 3,000 million nuts annually against a national demand of 4,500 million. To tackle this, CBL Global Foods is deploying a SMART agriculture package comprising drip irrigation, balanced nutrition programs, and intercropping systems. These interventions are designed to rapidly enhance yields, with an ambitious goal to double productivity to 15,000 nuts per hectare within three years.

The project targets farmers in Sri Lanka’s North-Western, North-Central, and Northern provinces, regions poised to become the country’s second “coconut triangle.” This initiative not only promises increased yields but also provides direct market access, fair pricing, and financial support through supply chain financing, ensuring timely payments to farmers.

“We are excited to partner with USAID on this transformative journey. At CBL Global Foods, we believe in empowering small and medium-scale coconut farmers with innovative tools and technology, which will significantly uplift their productivity and livelihoods,” Randeewa Malalasooriya, Chief Executive Officer of CBL Global Foods Limited said.

NDB Bank partners with University of Sri Jayewardenepura to empower next gen leaders

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.