Ex-President Ranil urges voters to support ‘experienced candidates’ in 2024 General Election

The leader of the United National Party (UNP), former President Ranil Wickremesinghe has called on voters to elect to the Parliament candidates with proven experience in managing economic crises as the country faces ongoing challenges.

Making a special statement ahead of the upcoming parliamentary election, Wickremesinghe emphasized that those who have worked with him over the past two years are best suited to guide the nation forward.

“In these difficult times, it is vital that we have leaders in Parliament who know how to handle an economic crisis. Whether you are in the opposition or part of the government, without this experience, you will fail to meet the country’s goals,” Wickremesinghe said.

“I urge the supporters of all political parties to vote for our experienced candidates,” he added.

Wickremesinghe also made a special appeal to those who did not vote in the previous election that in order to solve the country’s economic problem and move forward, the experienced people should be in the Parliament.

He stressed that the future of the country depends on electing leaders with the right skills to solve the economic issues and ensure the nation’s recovery.

Highlighting his leadership in the previous presidential election, where he ran under the symbol of the ‘gas cylinder’ with broad support from representatives of diverse political parties including the UNP, the Sri Lanka Podujana Peramuna (SLPP), and other political groups, Wickremesinghe noted that this coalition continues to stand strong.

“A portion of those MPs and UNP officials who worked with me are now joining together in this election under the ‘New Democratic Front’. With their experience and dedication, they will ensure the success of this new parliamentary term,” he added.

Wickremesinghe concluded his statement by urging citizens to cast their valuable vote for the candidates with the expertise to lead the nation through this crucial period, stating, “If we succeed in this effort, we can rebuild the country and secure a better future for all.”