Expressway passengers must buckle up from Sept. 19

Colombo, Sep. 14 (Daily Mirror) - The mandatory seat belt regulation for vehicles travelling on Sri Lanka’s expressways will be strictly enforced from September 19, 2026, with both front- and rear-seat passengers required to wear seat belts.

The government has introduced the requirement as part of wider measures to improve road safety and reduce the risk of serious injuries in the event of accidents on expressways.

The regulation will also apply to public passenger buses operating on expressways. Bus operators will be required to ensure that the necessary seat-belt facilities are installed, while passengers using equipped seats will be required to wear them.

The National Transport Commission (NTC) has warned that legal action, including fines where applicable, could be taken against bus operators who fail to provide the required facilities and against drivers or passengers who fail to comply with the regulation.

An awareness programme on the new requirement was held near the Peliyagoda Expressway entrance. NTC officials briefed passengers and bus operators on the importance of wearing seat belts and distributed awareness material.

NTC Chairman P.K. Chandrapala said the programme, which had been postponed for various reasons, would be implemented without further delay from September 19.

“Our main objective is to provide a safe and comfortable journey for passengers who use public transportation,” Chandrapala said, appealing for public cooperation.

The programme is being implemented with the participation of the Ministry of Transport, Highways and Urban Development and the Traffic Police.

The NTC said awareness programmes for highway bus operators and passengers will continue ahead of and following the enforcement of the regulation.

NTC Director General Nilan Miranda and Director of Situation Control Sherin Athukorala were among the officials who attended the awareness programme.

Seat belt law to be strictly enforced on expressways from September 19

Seat belt rule to be strictly enforced on Expressways from September 19