Sri Lanka cbank: rupee appreciation due to high inflows; depreciation possible in late 2024

ECONOMYNEXT – Sri Lanka’s recent rupee appreciation is due to higher foreign currency inflows compared to the outflows, but there is a possibility for depreciation in the latter part of this year, central bank officials said.

The rupee currency has seen an appreciation in the recent months and traded around 300 rupees per U.S. dollar this week compared to 320 rupee in January this year.

President Ranil Wickremesinghe, who is also the island nation’s Finance Minister, had expected the rupee to appreciate to around 270 per US dollar by June this year.

“The main reason is we have more inflows,” D. S. T. Wanaguru, Director, at the Central Bank’s International Operations Department told reporters at a media briefing in Colombo on Friday (16).

“The market has more foreign currency liquidity than the outflows. That has facilitated the central bank to purchase more foreign currency from the market.”

The rupee appreciated 12.1 percent against the US dollar last year and 8.1 percent so far this year with the central bank has been on the buying side, she said.

However, the central bank’s inflation projection showed it has included possible rupee depreciation as a risk for inflation to reverse its slowing trend.

“These are the possible risks. It is not certain. The risk assessment is such that we are considering all possible scenarios on the upside as well as the downside. So on the upside is one major possibility is depreciation,” S. Jegajeevan, director at the Central Bank’s Economic Research Department told reporters.

“Currently the exchange rate is decided by the market forces; the demand and supply. So we are talking about some vehicle import relaxation and all. So we may be having some higher import level.”

“In that case if we are not getting enough inflows, there could be possibilities of some depreciation,” she said.

“We have to assume that. We are not certain that there will be a depreciation, but this is a possibility.” (Colombo/August 16/2024)