Sri Lanka’s rubber workers get certified, coconut pluckers and toddy tappers to follow

ECONOMYNEXT – Sri Lanka’s National Apprentice and Industrial Training Authority is working with the Ministry of Agriculture and Plantation Industry to upskill informal sector workers in the country.

169 rubber workers, or those who harvest the sap, were awarded NVQ-3 certificates by NAITA in a first for the country, on Thursday (15) at the Agalawatta Rubber Research Institute.

“Today these rubber harvesters were given nationally and internationally recognised competency certificates. We will also provide this qualification to palmyrah, kithul, cocount toddy tappers and pluckers,” Minister of Agriculture and Plantation Industries Mahinda Amaraweera was quoted as saying at the event.

“So they get an opportunity to even earn income abroad,” Amaraweera said, according to a statement by the Department of Government Information.

Remittances from migrant workers is one of the country’s main sources of income. But Sri Lanka’s migrant workers have mostly been limited to the low-skilled category. After a foreign exchange crisis, the country is keen to move its workers to the ‘skilled’ worker category.

The country is also keen to increase exports. “There are 35 million rubber trees in our country. Only 17 million of them are cut for latex. The remaining 18 million rubber trees are not harvested,” Amaraweera said.

“Crepe rubber in our country is currently considered the best rubber in the world. Annually, our country receives 1,000 million US dollars from the export of rubber. But we have the ability to increase this amount to 2,000 million US dollars.”

Amarweera said Sri Lanka needed to reevaluate its crops and techniques: “In the lower wet zone, especially in Kalutara District, most of the lands where rubber is cultivated do not get a proper harvest. There are several reasons for that. One is the constant rain in this area. Another issue is labor shortage. Because of this, new technology should be introduced to cut latex.

“So, the Rubber Research Institute should think about whether to expand rubber cultivation in these areas. Instead, rubber cultivation can be expanded to areas like Monaragala, Anuradhapura, Polonnaruwa, Ampara in the dry zone.” (Colombo/Feb16/2024)