Sri Lanka launches fortified rice lunch programme to address malnutrition

ECONOMYNEXT — Some half a million school children in Sri Lanka are expected to benefit from a fortified rice lunch distribution programme over an eight month period, the government said.

The Ministry of Agriculture and Plantation Industries, the Ministry of Education, the World Food Programme, the National Food Promotion Board and the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation (BMGF) have collaborated on the project, a statement from the president’s office said.

The launch of the programme was held in Colombo on Thursday February 01.

“The program smeeeks to enhance the nutritional status of school children, addressing issues such as anemia, memory impairment and stunted growth. Approximately five hundred thousand school children are expected to benefit from fortified rice lunches over an eight-month period,” the statement said.

Speaking at the event, Senior Adviser to the President on National Security and the Chief of Presidential Staff Sagala Ratnayaka said nurturing a healthy future generation was essential. Nutrition is a critical factor in shaping the country’s destiny beyond merely satisfying hunger, he said, expressing Sri Lanka’s gratitude for the support received from various stakeholders including the BMGF.

The nutrition programme’s roots date back to 2003 with the intervention of the World Food Programme. The ongoing efforts align with President Wickremesinghe’s vision for a poverty-free and healthier Sri Lanka, said Ratnayake.

The expansion and strengthening of a programme initiated to aid war-affected areas in the Northern and Eastern provinces was satisfactory, the official had noted, according to the statement.

“Originating in four districts, the programme broadened its scope to six districts following the tsunami in 2004. Supported by various ministries and organisations, the initiative has evolved to encompass a wider geographical area, reflecting its continued impact and success.

“Following the unprecedented economic crisis exacerbated by the COVID-19 pandemic, poverty levels in Sri Lanka experienced a significant surge. In response, a stabilisation programme was initiated, spearheaded by President Ranil Wickremesinghe, with a primary focus on addressing poverty,” he said. (Colombo/Feb02/2024)