Wildlife Department gets new vehicles to tackle elephant conflicts

Colombo, July 27 (Daily Mirror) - The Department of Wildlife Conservation (DWC) has launched a programme to strengthen field operations and improve efforts to mitigate human-elephant conflicts by providing new vehicles, including double cabs and motorcycles, to its officers.

Under the programme, 16 double cabs and 181 motorcycles purchased by the DWC were officially handed over to the department by Environment Minister Dr. Dammika Patabendi at the DWC premises in Battaramulla Friday (24).

The vehicles will be allocated mainly to wildlife offices in areas experiencing frequent human-elephant conflicts and forest-related issues, enabling officers to carry out field duties more efficiently.

During the symbolic handover ceremony, 16 double cabs and 40 motorcycles were handed over to DWC Additional Director General (Operations) Manjula Amararatne by the Minister.

The double cabs were handed over to the Minister by United Motors Lanka Limited Executive Director Buddhika Sinhage, while David Peiris Motor Company Director and Chief Operating Officer Nalaka Madugalle presented the motorcycles.

The remaining vehicles and motorcycles will be distributed among regional wildlife offices based on operational requirements.

The Cabinet of Ministers had earlier approved the purchase of 294 vehicles for the DWC, including 16 double cabs, 84 single cabs, 181 motorcycles, nine tractors, one hand tractor and three crew cabs.

The Cabinet approval was granted on August 18, 2025, following a proposal submitted by Minister Patabendi to purchase essential vehicles to enhance the operations of island-wide wildlife protection and field offices under the Ministry of Environment.

Meanwhile, nine tractors imported by DIMO for the DWC were handed over to Director General of Wildlife Conservation Ranjan Marasinghe by the Minister at the department’s Dematagoda yard on June 20.

The government has taken several measures to address shortages of human and physical resources within the DWC, with the acquisition of new vehicles identified as a key step towards improving wildlife conservation activities and managing human-elephant conflicts.