Sri Lankan innovation, startup potential dazzle at AsiaBerlin

Showcasing Sri Lankan innovation on a global stage at Sri Lanka Tech Connect, Venture Café Berlin

Sri Lanka captured global attention at the AsiaBerlin Summit 2025, showcasing the country’s expanding innovation and startup potential. Through a dynamic delegation of tech companies and high-level networking, the country demonstrated the strength, adaptability, and entrepreneurial spirit driving its digital economy.

The summit provided a platform to position Sri Lanka’s innovation ecosystem and build meaningful connections in Europe, emphasising the role as an emerging partner in the international startup community.

Sri Lanka’s relationship with the AsiaBerlin Forum began in April 2021, when Sri Lankan Ambassador to Germany Manori Unambuwe facilitated the signing of a Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) between the AsiaBerlin Forum and the Information and Communication Technology Agency of Sri Lanka (ICTA). That partnership led to the first Sri Lanka Satellite Event at AsiaBerlin Forum 2021, laying groundwork for what would become an increasingly substantial presence.

Backed by the Export Development Board (EDB), the collaboration deepened through 2023 and 2024, with Sri Lankan delegations attending both summits and engaged in founder development programs, investor matchmaking, and market access initiatives.

However, 2025 marked a turning point with Sri Lanka making a strong impression at the AsiaBerlin Summit 2025. Under the leadership of Chief Adviser to the President on Digital Economy Dr. Hans Wijayasuriya, a Sri Lankan delegation of 11 innovative technology companies representing healthtech, biotech, HRtech, greentech, e-mobility, fintech, deeptech, and the creative industries, showcased the country’s innovative ecosystem, building valuable connections in Europe.

The delegation included, DiabSense, hSenid Business Solutions, ChargeNet, Elektrateq, AIgrow, ConscientAI, X-venture Global Solutions, PayMedia, Jendo Innovations, ConvogridAI, and Quantum Tunnel Design.

Dr. Wijayasuriya delivered the official opening remarks, highlighting Sri Lanka’s national digital vision and collaboration pathways with Asia and Europe. He later joined a high-level panel on ‘Investment: Asia as a Growth Engine for Europe,’ positioning Sri Lanka as a strategic partner in cross-continental innovation.

Dr. Wijayasuriya, ICTA Associate Chief Digital Officer Sachindra Samararatne, and AsiaBerlin Ambassador and Accentae Consulting Ltd., CEO Manori Unambuwe also participated in a VIP breakfast hosted by Berlin’s Governing Mayor Kai Wegner, facilitating interactions with senior policymakers and innovation ecosystem leaders.

At the ‘Sri Lanka Tech Connect’ satellite event, startup founders, investors, ecosystem leaders, and diplomatic representatives were in attendance. All 11 companies delivered live product demonstrations to European stakeholders.

After a welcome from Venture Café Director Ewa Emilia Geresz, Sri Lankan Ambassador to Germany Varuni Muthukumarana opened the program. AsiaBerlin Forum Vice President Timon Rupp acknowledged Sri Lanka’s regional importance.

The main panel, ‘Unlocking the Next Frontier in Innovation in South Asia,’ featured Carl Härtlein, Marten Rauschenberg, and Manori Unambuwe discussing Sri Lanka’s innovation potential. AsiaBerlin Forum President Dr. Rainer Seider closed by emphasising the forum’s commitment to deepening the partnership

The summit also provided valuable engagement opportunities for Sri Lankan tech companies with leading global organisations and industry figures, including, International Startup Partnerships at Universitätsmedizin Berlin (Charité) Head of Match and Connect Luise Roither, Anthropogenic Founder and CEO Jason Petralia, and Porsche Consulting Senior Partner Dr. David Romanowski. These interactions signalled the growing recognition of Sri Lanka’s innovation ecosystem and its potential to forge impactful international collaborations.

Saint Clair Advisory and Capital Founder/CEO Carl Härtlein said: “The AsiaBerlin delegation’s presence in Berlin was a proud moment for Sri Lanka. Their dedication, organisational and financial, demonstrated the strength of our innovation ecosystem. With confidence and fact‑based insights, they showed where Sri Lanka stands today and where it is headed tomorrow.”

Participation was driven by the commitment of 11 tech companies, who fully self‑funded their travel and costs. Their hunger and determination echoed the strength of Sri Lanka’s innovation ecosystem, opening doors for future collaborations.

A participant from Diabsense, Kosala Jayasundara said: “At ABS, we could get a much focused attention and build important business connections with ease. Unlike large events where it is quite hard to receive the attention of the right people, ABS type focused events, with the right audience in attendance, was useful for companies like us trying to build long term bridges with the right people.”

Sri Lanka’s delegation secured impactful networking outcomes at the AsiaBerlin Summit 2025. 60% of delegates formed 4–7 meaningful business connections and 20% established over 13 or more, highlighting the depth of engagement with global stakeholders. Overall, 80% of participants generated over four substantial relationships, and all local participants reported potential partnership connections with strong collaboration prospects for the innovation ecosystem. Importantly, it has translated into tangible commercial traction, as 80% of delegates initiated new leads or partnerships, bridging the summit’s outcome with the country’s long-term digital economy strategy and export goals

Sri Lanka’s performance at AsiaBerlin Summit 2025 highlights Sri Lanka’s role as a national pillar in the global digital economy setting stage for the country’s readiness to compete, connect, and shape the future.

Startup Genome Founder Marc Penzel launching the Sri Lanka Startup Genome Report at the Sri Lankan Pavilion, AsiaBerlin Summit 2025

Chief Adviser to the President on Digital Economy Dr. Hans Wijayasuriya (centre) and ICTA Associate Chief Digital Officer Sachindra Samararatne, leading the Sri Lankan tech delegation, welcoming Berlin Senator for Economic Affairs Franziska Giffey during her visit to the Sri Lankan Pavilion at the AsiaBerlin Summit 2025