Eva leads national effort to raise awareness on menstrual health

Eva, the leading sanitary napkin brand in Sri Lanka, partnered with the Ministry of Education, Sri Lanka Police and Team Hero Foundation to launch a transformative educational initiative titled “Eva Danamuthu Daru – Danagenama Lokuwemu” under the national program “Magaharunu Padama.” The “Eva Danamuthu Daru – Danagenama Lokuwemu” initiative aims to raise awareness about feminine health, puberty, reproductive health, and menstruation in over 3,000 girls’ schools across the island.

The inauguration of the “Magaharunu Padama” program was held on October 1st in honor of World Children’s Day, graced by the newly appointed Prime Minister, Dr. Harini Amarasuriya, along with other delegates and officials from the Ministry of Education and Sri Lanka Police. This effort is designed to fill the gaps in education about areas often surrounded by stigma and misinformation.

Eva’s involvement in this initiative is a testament to its ongoing mission to empower women and children through education and promote period positivity. The brand’s dedication to fostering an informed society extends beyond its product offerings, as it steps into the role of advocate for breaking societal taboos. A key part of this initiative is the special edition of Eva sanitary napkins, featuring packaging with the helpline number 109, launched by Sri Lanka Police and Children and Women Bureau to support women and children facing violence. At the event, Eva handed over these limited-edition packs to the Sri Lanka Police and Children and Women Bureau, reinforcing its commitment to social responsibility.

Sri Lanka Gem and Jewellery Association congratulates President Anura Kumara Dissanayake

WIS Accountancy launches AI-driven mortgage platform ‘MortgagX’ and announces major job expansion

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.