Missteps can lead to pratfalls

The JVP-NPP government’s efforts to increase the retirement ages of the judges of the Supreme Court (SC) and the Court of Appeal (CA) has triggered an avalanche of criticism. The Judicial Service Association of Sri Lanka (JSASL), which represents all District Court judges and Magistrates in the country, has also opposed the government move. It has written to President Anura Kumara Dissanayake, informing him of its decision. However, the government remains unresponsive.

Ironically, the JVP affronted elderly politicians and officials in previous administrations, claiming that they were past their productive years and therefore had to be put out to pasture. But no sooner had it formed a government in 2024 than it brought two former police officers, Ravi Seneviratne and Shani Abeysekera, out of retirement and elevated them as the Secretary to the Ministry of Public Security and the Director of the CID, respectively, because they were members of the NPP’s Retired Police Collective. Its action compromised the integrity of the CID and the Ministry of Public Security. Now, it is trying to extend the retirement ages of some members of the judiciary selectively.

Several leading lawyers’ associations, both local and foreign, prominent political leaders and legal luminaries have unequivocally taken exception to the government’s proposed plan to amend the Constitution to extend the tenure of the SC and CA judges. The Bar Association of Sri Lanka (BASL) is leading the campaign against the government plan at issue. Its arguments are cogent. The Colombo Law Society has also asked President Dissanayake not to proceed with the proposed constitutional amendment and warned that such a move could undermine public confidence in the judiciary. The Colombo High Court Lawyers’ Association has also called upon the government to abandon its controversial plan which, if implemented, will undermine judicial independence, disrupt career progression within the judicial service, and erode public confidence in the judiciary. The opponents of the government’s questionable move also include LAWASIA (the Law Association for Asia and the Pacific), which consists of regional association of lawyers, judges, jurists, legal academics and legal organisations in the Asia-Pacific region, and the Commonwealth Lawyers’ Association, which promotes the rule of law, an independent legal profession, access to justice, human rights and high standards of legal ethics.

All arguments put forth by the aforesaid legal associations are compelling. They have pointed out that a change benefiting sitting judges could create a perception of favouritism; judicial tenure is closely linked to the separation of powers and constitutional safeguards; any reform should follow broad consultation rather than a rushed constitutional amendment, and existing vacancies numbering four each in the SC and the CA, should be filled immediately through proper appointments rather than extending the tenure of current judges.

One may recall that in 2024, the then Speaker Mahinda Yapa Abeywardena told Parliament that following the resignation of President Gotabaya Rajapaksa at the height of Aragalaya, in July 2022, a foreign envoy and a group of Sri Lankans had striven to pressure him into appointing himself Acting President in violation of the Constitution, and their intention had been to plunge Sri Lanka into anarchy, like Libya. Tens of thousands of protesters were trying to march on Parliament at that time. The JVP has admitted that it sought to lead those protesters to Parliament. Luckily, Sri Lanka did not become Asia’s Libya in 2022, but four years on, under a JVP-led government, it runs the risk of facing the same fate as Zimbabwe!

Addressing a recent BASL public forum, CLA President Steven Thiru warned that Sri Lanka would risk repeating Zimbabwe’s judicial crisis if it went ahead with its controversial plan to extend the retirement ages of sitting judges arbitrarily. If Sri Lanka proceeded with an ad hoc, non-transparent extension of Superior Court judges’ tenure without a broad consultative process, it risked plunging its legal system into a crisis of legitimacy similar to that in Zimbabwe, he warned.

The government must abandon its ill-conceived plan to amend the Constitution to extend the tenure of the superior court judges. Instead, it must take steps to fill the vacancies in the SC and the CA. Let it be warned that missteps can lead to pratfalls.

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.