‘Climate Challenge SL’ invites data professionals to first-ever hackathon

Initiative aimed at generating innovative data-driven solutions to climate change related issues in agriculture and fisheries

With the support of the United States Agency for International Development (USAID), and in partnership with the Climate Collective Foundation (CCF), the Lanka Impact Investment Network (LIIN) is proud to announce the launch of Sri Lanka’s first-ever data hackathon, ‘Climate Challenge SL.’

This hackathon aims to revolutionise the agriculture and fisheries sectors by addressing climate change related impacts through innovative data-driven solutions.

Data professionals from across the country are called to apply for ‘Climate Challenge SL’ before 31 October. Primarily a youth-focused initiative, aiming to encourage more youth to engage in climate action, anyone from any part of the country is invited to apply.

‘Climate Challenge SL – Creative Data Solutions for Resilience’ is designed to help mitigate climate change related issues faced by the agriculture and fisheries sectors. Climate change results in compounding effects on the two economic sectors, previously hampered by COVID-19 restrictions and the macroeconomic crises. The two sectors in focus provide livelihoods for over 30% of the population, contribute to the country’s economic growth, and are critical for national food security. ‘Climate Challenge SL’ will open an innovators space for data professionals from across the country to incubate ideas and solutions for grassroots application in climate resilience practices.

With the call for applications open from 5 September-31 October via www.liin.lk, LIIN will reach out through workshops/webinars and social media platforms to target 400 potential teams of data professionals from across the country for the hackathon. The LIIN, USAID, and CCF will select 20 diverse and inclusive teams from these applicants.

Through a series of workshops and webinars, these teams will be provided with an opportunity to access real-world data and to work together to address the challenges posed by climate change, utilising advanced technologies such as artificial intelligence (AI), machine learning (ML), big data analytics, and the Internet of Things (IoT).

‘Climate Challenge SL’ will also offer these teams valuable mentorship support from industry experts to help fast-track the creation of innovative data-driven solutions to climate change issues faced by the agriculture and fisheries sectors. The top 10 teams will also have the exclusive opportunity to further develop or scale-up their innovations by pitching their groundbreaking ideas and models to impact investors.

The USAID, through the Climate Adaptation Project, and LIIN commit to promote youth-led, context-specific innovative solutions to foster a climate resilient future. This is underscored by the ‘Climate Challenge SL’ which aims to harness the power of data to enhance the climate adaptation capabilities of the agriculture and fisheries sectors in Sri Lanka. USAID Mission Director for Sri Lanka Gabriel Grau said: “The United States is committed to helping Sri Lanka tackle climate change head-on. ‘Climate Challenge SL’ is about sparking fresh ideas to strengthen the country’s agriculture and fisheries sectors. The USAID is inviting a diverse group of data professionals from all over Sri Lanka to join us in this climate hackathon and develop innovative solutions for a more sustainable future.

LIIN Chairman Chandula Abeywickrema said: “Today marks a significant milestone in our journey towards a resilient and sustainable future for Sri Lanka’s agriculture and fisheries sectors. ‘Climate Challenge SL’ is not just a hackathon, it is a movement that empowers our country’s data professionals to harness the power of innovation and data. We are immensely grateful for the support from the USAID Climate Adaptation Project and all our collaborative partners in making this vision a reality.”

For applications for ‘Climate Challenge SL’, apply via https://forms.gle/fXGJNLb1icdC1xGNA or visit website www.liin.lk or call hotline 0776051256.