Police obtain detention orders on suspects arrested over threats to Israelis

Police have obtained detention orders to question three suspects arrested in connection with alleged security threats to Israeli nationals in Sri Lanka, according to Police Spokesman DIG Nihal Thalduwa.

The three suspects had been arrested by the Terrorism Investigation Division (TID), it was reported yesterday.

Public Security Minister Vijitha Herath, speaking at a press conference yesterday, confirmed the arrests were based on intelligence reports indicating potential threats to Israelis amidst heightened Middle Eastern tensions.

“Intelligence agencies received information about it. Upon receiving that information, we immediately took action. Today marks one month since this government took office. During the month, the security council met on several occasions,” he said.

He further stated that the public, local as well as foreigners, need not entertain any fears on probable attacks on Israelis or any others, as all possible security measures have been taken to ensure their safety.

On October 23, Israel’s national Security Council had issued an urgent warning to Israeli citizens to leave popular tourist areas in southern Sri Lanka immediately, and classified the Arugam Bay region as a level four threat, advising Israelis to take precautions, such as concealing their Jewish identity and avoiding large gatherings.

“The Israeli security establishment is maintaining close communication with Sri Lankan security authorities and closely monitoring the situation,” the council stated.

It also advised Israelis in other parts of Sri Lanka to exercise caution and avoid holding large public gatherings.

The security alert followed a warning from the US Embassy in Colombo, which said it had received credible information about a potential attack in Arugam Bay. “US citizens are strongly advised to avoid the area until further notice,” the statement said.

The Russian Embassy and the UK issued a similar warnings to its citizens, urging them to remain vigilant and avoid large gatherings.

Security has subsequently been tightened in tourist hotspots across the island including Arugam Bay.