Much ado about crime: Fish or cut bait

Sri Lankan legislators never miss an opportunity to affirm their commitment to the principle of natural justice, the presumption of innocence, etc., but they unflinchingly use their parliamentary privileges to insult others, and even treat suspects in custody as guilty and carry out vilification campaigns. One wonders whether they are trying to run a parallel judiciary, as it were. Ruling party members predict arrests and the incarceration of their political rivals. This deplorable practice, however, is not of recent origin.

Opposition Leader Sajith Premadasa and Deputy Minister of Media Dr. Kaushalya Ariyarathne had a heated argument in Parliament on Thursday over crime and criminals in politics. Ariyarathne claimed that the JVP-NPP government had prevented a person who even obtained protection money (kappan) from underworld figures from securing the post of deputy leader in the SJB. She mentioned the name of Charith Abeysinghe currently in remand custody. Premadasa retorted that a party that had committed heinous crimes was now levelling baseless allegations against his party. His reference was obviously to the JVP and its past crimes.

During the past several decades, lawmakers have abused their parliamentary privileges by treating some suspects as guilty solely because of their arrests, without leaving the determination of guilt or innocence of the suspects to the judiciary in the interests of fairness and the separation of powers. Suspects and others who are at the receiving end of such malicious attacks carried out by legislators during their parliamentary speeches have no means of defending themselves. If sovereignty resides in the people and Parliament only exercises their legislative power vested in it, they should be able to seek redress when legislators blatantly violate their rights, taking cover behind parliamentary privileges.

One may recall that Parliament was turned into a kangaroo court during the second term of President Mahinda Rajapaksa, and the then Chief Justice Dr. Shirani Bandaranayake was subjected to vilification by a parliamentary Select Committee, which was packed with Rajapaksa supporters. Obviously, due process was not followed in ‘impeaching’ her. That being the experience of a Chief Justice, the helplessness of ordinary people who become targets of malicious attacks by legislators goes without saying.

Strangely, the MPs who conduct what may be described as legislative trials and trade allegations of criminal offences baulk at having high-profile crimes probed. The incumbent government made a hue and cry about the Batalanda torture chambers, where hundreds, if not thousands, of suspects were ‘put to the question’ before being killed. It alleged former President Ranil Wickremesinghe’s involvement in them. Most of the victims were JVP members or sympathisers. So, it was widely thought that the JVP-NPP government would get to the bottom of it. But what has become of the much-publicised probe is anybody’s guess. Has the government got cold feet as the probe is very likely to open a can of worms for it, given the numerous crimes the JVP committed during its second uprising in the late 1980s? The JVP leaders should explain to the public why they opted for a political honeymoon with the UNP under Ranil Wickremesinghe’s leadership from 2015 to 2019.

President Anura Kamara Dissanayake has declared that his government will not allow serious crimes to be buried in the sands of time. So, he should have all crimes committed under successive governments probed. Prosecution for serious crimes is not time-barred, and he ought to appoint a special presidential commission to probe all political killings since 1977. Why the JVP-led government has not ordered an investigation into the extrajudicial execution of JVP founder Rohana Wijeweera in 1989 is the question. Some of the perpetrators of that crime are said to be still alive, and they must be brought to justice.

The SJB should make a pledge in its next election manifesto to have the crimes which its leader Premadasa says the JVP committed in the 1987-89 period, investigated thoroughly. It should also explain why its leaders did not call for a probe into those crimes while they were in power from 2015 to 2019 as members of the UNP-led Yahapalana government. They had no qualms about enlisting the JVP’s support to retain their hold on power following the SLFP’s pullout from their government. The JVP even had representation in the National Executive Council of the Yahapalana government.

When the members of the current Parliament clash, accusing one another of criminal activities, it is a case of the pot calling the kettle black. They ought to stop trading accusations and have those crimes probed while in power. They should fish or cut bait.

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.