In Quest for Gold, Pathirage Braved Every Demon

‘Money, fame and losing your head is meaningless if you cannot be the athlete you want to be'

Rumesh Tharanga Pathirage traded his bat for the Javelin, survived wild elephant attacks and drove a mini truck in the dead of night just to realise his Olympic Dream.

AUG.07 (Mirror Sports) - Determined to make his country rub shoulders with the world’s elite nations, fight all barriers that discourage young sportsmen and do the impossible even if it meant dicing with death, Sri Lanka’s eyebrow-raising head turning javelin artiste Rumesh Pathirage went through near hell in his timeline to become the world’s best in the glamorous track and field arena. Pathirage stopped at nothing in his dream heading for the goldmine and even braved more than one wild elephant attack in the dead of night as he steered a miniature delivery truck heading for Ampara during the Covid 19 pandemic after the vehicle’s driver fell asleep at the wheel.

All because he wanted to train and found good space and encouragement during the period of isolation as his father Thushara Pathirage, a para military police officer in the Special Task Force served in the eastern province.

In an exclusive interview with the Daily Mirror today, Pathirage revealed he was the most high-handed and rebelliously upstart kid at his original school at Sri Palee College in Horana and was the first to stand up and be counted much to the amazement of his teachers who came scouting around for sportsmen in any field of play.

“You name the sport and I was ready for any kind of action. I was the kind of child from grade two who would jump at the idea of doing any sport. Even as a child my way of thinking was that if you want to succeed, be head strong, go out make the impossible happen, take up all challenges, be rough and tough. I never wasted my time and hated just being in one place”, Pathirage disclosed in the interview a day after the whole of Sri Lanka opened its eyes to a possible Olympic gold with the announcement that he had grabbed the number one world ranking in the javelin throw.

But Pathirage, who learned about discipline from his athlete father, also sees himself as some kind of a gentle giant but never taking a step back ever ready to set the course and let others follow creating a kind of image that Sri Lanka has never had before with most medal winners in the past preferring to serve themselves by demanding everything short of the Head-of State’s position.

“Money and glory should not be the concern, but having the right environment. Being a role model to others and doing what I can for my country while changing everything that needs to be changed is what matters. I am not the best educated in the country but I have the brains to think far and not be fooled”, said Pathirage who was fortunate to come under the care of the Foundation of Goodness headed by ex- Sri Lanka Cricket secretary Kushil Gunasekera when they found out an under-privileged village country boy needed a godfather after he finished his schooling. Unknown to many and perhaps grudged by a losing few, Pathirage could have been one of the best cricketing all-rounders for Sri Lanka had he not traded the English summer sport for athletics.

At his original school Sri Palee College in Horana, before crossing over to St. Peter’s College in Colombo where he graduated in the javelin under the guidance of coach Tony Prasanna, Pathirage bowled at a fast pace and on one occasion when the chips were down hammered a hundred against Royal College in an Under-15 match.

“Not sure why they (Royal College) did not ask me” Pathirage said in a tongue-in-cheek remark as he showed a video of some of his power hitting at the crease in an age when sixes and not singles is the name of the game The Peterites however grabbed him as a 15-year old not to play cricket but because coach Prasanna saw the Olympian in him and alerted the school’s rector Fr. Trevor Martin. Even before full-filing his Olympic gold quest, Pathirage has become the most recognisable face in the country as he goes around with the Foundation of Goodness scouting for athletes. “People recognise me easily but I don’t get carried away. I am down to earth”, said Pathirage, a Sergeant in the Air Force.