Sri Lanka govt distances itself from UNP call for postponing elections

ECONOMYNEXT — The government has distanced itself from a statement by President Ranil Wickremesinghe’s United National Party (UNP) calling for delaying elections by two years.

Labour Minister Manusha Nanayakkara responding to questions from journalists on Tuesday May 28 said all political parties represented in parliament are free to make proposals, but the government would have to make a final decision.

President Ranil Wickremesinghe currently stands as an independent candidate, according to Nanayakkara, though he has yet to formally declare his candidacy.

“The president is an independent person. Yes, the UNP is his party. The UNP can make such a proposal. When a party makes such a proposal, it can be considered. When an early parliamentary election was proposed, we considered it and decided whether to hold that or the presidential election,” said Nanayakkara.

“Similarly a new proposal has been made. We don’t know how that will be considered, but the government would have to decide,” he added.

Nanayakkara was responding to a question about a statement made by UNP general secretary Palitha Range Bandara earlier Tuesday morning, callig for a referendum to postpone both presidential and parliamentary elections by two years to extend President Wickremesinghe’s term to continue ongoing economic reforms.

“Is Mr Palitha Range Bandara the government? He is the UNP secretary,” the minister said.

“The SLPP says parliamentary elections should be held. Will that be so because they have proposed it?” he added.

Nanayakkara reiterated that Bandara’s statement was not one from the government.

“The UNP can make statements, as can the SLPP or any other party. But let’s see what happens in the end,” he said.

Nanayakkara crossed over from the main opposition Samagi Jana Balawegaya (SJB) to support Wickremesinghe. He had said earlier in the week that would definitely win the presidential election.

“President Wickremesinghe will definitely win the election,” he said, adding that the president has provided much relief and that the economy continues to recover having fallen to its lowest point. (Colombo/May28/2024)