Premadasa vs Lalith: A recipe for conflict

I will not dwell in any detail about the numerous other issues that engaged the Minister’s (Athulathemudali) attention. That would add up to a book in itself. What I would do would be to briefly touch upon some selected matters. A structure of a Ministry is important and relevant as a facilitator or otherwise of work. There is also, in many ways a correlation between structure and achievement. In this vital area however, there was a major deficiency. At the political level, besides the Cabinet Minister, there were two Project Ministers, Mrs. Sunethra Ranasinghe, MP for Education Services and Mr. A.C.S. Hameed, MP for Higher Education.

Mr. Hameed, a senior party man and Minister was also the Cabinet Minister for Justice. Then there was the State Minister for Education Mrs. Pulendiran, MP. Project Ministers were considered higher in status to State Ministers, but all came under the Cabinet Minister. The structural problem really arose in the area under Mr. Hameed’s purview. Mr. Hameed, a former long serving Foreign Minister, was in the

recent past the Cabinet Minister for Higher Education and Science. Now, although he was still the Cabinet Minister for Justice, he was at the same time only the Project Minister for Higher Education, responsible to a much younger Cabinet Minister.

He was now Project Minister in an area where he had been Cabinet Minister before. In practical terms, this was a recipe for conflict, and that is precisely what occurred. Higher Education encompassed both University and Technical Education. The rest of the Ministry handled the vast area of general education. Mr. Hameed could not get over the fact that he was no longer the Cabinet Minister for Higher Education. He sought to act as if he was. The geographical severance, that prevailed, with general education at “Isurupaya” in Battararmulla, and Higher Education located at Ward Place in Colombo, only helped to reinforce this trend towards separation.

Soon we found that Mr. Hameed did not attend any meetings to which he was invited by the Minister. He also kept away from the Parliamentary Consultative Committee on Education, presumably because the Committee was chaired by the Cabinet Minister. The next thing that happened was that he lost his membership of that Committee, for absenting himself without leave on three consecutive occasions. He was probably unwilling to seek leave from Mr. Athulathmudali.

The Minister on his part was of the view that this whole arrangement was deliberately devised by the President to checkmate him, and so it appeared. No other Project Minister would have got away with this kind of action. The President for his part would definitely have known what was happening, because if there ever was a President or Prime Minister, who wanted to know everything that was occurring and had a network of people all over to keep him informed, it was Mr. Premadasa. In this, and in other actions lay the seed of greater conflicts to come.

The Minister was a strong personality. He was not prepared to meekly submit to any unilateral declaration of independence. He therefore set up an office for himself at Ward Place, and made it a point to go there and hold various meetings and discussions once or twice a week. To some of these meetings he summoned Vice Chancellors and the Chairman, University Grants Commission. They were obliged to come, even though the Project Minister was unhappy.

Mr. Athulathmudali, a trained lawyer, knew his legal rights. It must be said that those in the higher education sector welcomed opportunities to meet the Minister, although it was not a comfortable position for any of them, or for that matter for any of us. As Secretary to the overall Ministry, I too was placed in a most awkward and embarrassing position. I worked for the Cabinet Minister. The offices of the Project and State Ministers had senior public servants as Secretaries. But I had the responsibility of supervising their work. In the case of higher education, when I did that, there was a distinct possibility that I would tread om ministerial toes.

Mr. Abeygunawardena, the Secretary handling that area later to become Secretary to the Ministry of Health, was a disciplined public servant, who in spite of his own difficult position never attempted to by-pass me. He regularly consulted me and kept me briefed about all relevant matters. He regularly came to “Isurupaya” to meet me virtually in secret in order to discuss important matters. We both decided, that given the ground situation it was best that I avoided holding meetings at Ward Place.

Here again, I had every right to do so. But that was not the point. As Secretary to the Ministry, my responsibility as I saw it was not to take sides in an unfortunate tussle, but to devise practical ways and means to keep the work of the Ministry going.

Therefore, although the Minister wanted me to have a room at Ward Place and work from there too, I avoided this, even though a room was found for me. The Minister was quite correct in asserting his own rights. Asserting my own, would only have added to an unhappy situation. I therefore only went to Ward Place for meetings called by the Minister at which my presence was required by him.

The Chairman, University Grants Commission was Professor Arjuna Aluvihare. The UGC shared premises with the office of the Minister of Higher Education, or perhaps it was the other way round. Here, geographical and official proximity coincided The Chairman had to work closely with Minister Hameed, although he also had to attend meetings fixed by the Cabinet Minister. Everyone worked with an underlying degree of discomfort if not strain. Sometimes, affairs assumed almost comic proportions. There was a policy move to set up University Colleges, with a view to expanding opportunities for higher education. The concept however, had to be worked on.

A Senior Level Committee consisting of the UGC, academics, the Ministry and the private sector was envisaged to study all connected matters and to make recommendations. Naturally I had to be on that Committee as Secretary to the Ministry. One day Professor Aluvihare telephoned me in some distress and with evident embarrassment told me that Minister Hameed had not wanted me on the committee. He wanted to know what to do, although the whole thing was absurd.

I suggested that under these circumstances, it would be best to proceed in a practical way. I said that I didn’t have to be on the Committee in order to make myself available for any consultations that anyone may wish to have with me, and that it would make sense for him to proceed in the already established manner, which was discussion and consultation with me without formal meetings. The Chairman, UGC apologized and agreed. I said that the immediate challenge I faced was how to keep this away from the Cabinet Minister.

Had Mr. Athulathmudali heard of this he would have insisted that I served on the committee. In the end, this was how we functioned not only on this matter, but on all matters relating to higher education. We had to find ways and means to work effectively without generating conflict. The Vice Chancellors and others telephoned me from time to time, some times during the night, at home in order to discuss various issues. But I held no formal meetings at my level. The Minister of course did so, and these meetings we attended and follow up action taken.

These arrangements worked fairly satisfactorily in the area of University education, but not so well in the sphere of technical education. Here, with the merging of some Ministries and departments, technical education was being run from Additional Secretary Mr. Abeygunawardene’s office at Ward Place. This was an integral part of the Project Minister’s office and I did not therefore have a direct input. What I could see from a distance was that the whole structure was wrong and too bureaucratic to

deliver quality technical education. Information flows, decision making processes, supervising methods, the identification and fixing of accountability, all had to be attended to. I saw it as a major task. But in the prevailing climate, with a Project Minister who was also a Senior Cabinet Minister in the system, there was little that even the Cabinet Minister could do.

This important area therefore suffered from a considerable degree of neglect. It became a victim of the structure of the Ministry. Soon, donor agencies such as the ADB realized the problem. There were officials from these agencies who met me and expressed regret as to what was happening. However, they also had gone around and had a fairly clear notion of the real problem. They too were helpless. I did try a way out of this impasse. When I met the President on one occasion I mentioned to him the importance of technical education and suggested that he Chair a meeting on the subject at least quarterly.

The President did not disagree and in my recollection, much later a meeting was held. But he probably did not have the time to do this on a regular basis. My intention on making the suggestion to the President was to construct a forum where the Cabinet Minister, the Project Minister, the Secretaries and Senior Officials could have met in neutral territory and used the President’s clout to move technical education to a sustainable track. Unfortunately it did not work out.

Meanwhile, the Minister was getting somewhat irritated and frustrated by all this. This was aggravated by deteriorating personal relations with the President. The reasons were several. Some were quite petty. For instance, Mr. Athulathmudali’s official car was relatively old and was breaking down from time to time. Some episodes reported related to times when Mrs. Athulathmudali was travelling in the car. This was naturally very upsetting to the Minister. On one celebrated occasion, the car broke down when the Minister was on his way to Parliament, and an MP passing by had to give him a lift.

The prevailing rule was that the President had to personally clear new cars for Ministers, and although I had spoken several times to a sympathetic Secretary to the Treasury, Mr. Paskaralingam, even he could not obtain a decision. This therefore, consisted a serious irritation on a daily basis. The Minister also felt that his visits abroad were being curtailed. For instance he was not permitted to go and deliver a lecture on an invitation from a prestigious international forum dealing with Agriculture. The logic presumably would have been that he was no longer Minister of Agriculture. But this was a personal invitation in recognition of his stature in this field.

This was not all. Ministers had to declare their assets to the President. This was a time there was litigation between the SLFP Member of Parliament Mr. C.V. Gooneratne and the Minister, during the course of which certain irregularities in the purchase of ships by the Ceylon Shipping Corporation were alleged by Mr. Gooneratne, at the time when the Minister was in charge of the subject of shipping. The Minister mentioned to me that he knew that a copy of his assets declaration was given to Mr. Gooneratne by the President. The point is not whether he in fact did so or not. The point was that the Minister believed that he had done so. Probably he had some inside information.

There were more issues that surfaced as time went on. One day the Minister told me that the President was getting a special team under the direction of his personal security advisor to investigate matters in his former Ministry of Trade and Shipping. “He is trying desperately to find something on me,” he said, adding, “He thinks that he can do this without my knowing!” The fact was that the Minister was at one time also Minister of National Security, in which position he worked closely with the Armed Services and the Police. He therefore, personally knew a large number of officers from the Police and the Services, and many liked him and were personally loyal to him. Obtaining information therefore was not a problem for Mr. Athulathmudali.

(Excerpted from In Pursuit of Governance, the autobiography of MDD Pieris) ✍️

Empowering the next generation: A vision for students’ leadership in Sri Lanka

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.