Access Motors triumphs in the prestigious JLR Asia Pacific Service Advisor Competition

Ibrahim Rahminthulla, a seasoned Service Advisor at Access Motors, has clinched the top spot in a highly competitive Asia Pacific Region Service Advisor Competition. This prestigious recognition highlights his exceptional customer service skills and technical expertise.

Competing against 43 skilled service advisors from 16 countries, Ibrahim’s ability to consistently deliver outstanding service experience, his profound knowledge of JLR vehicles and his technical expertise set him apart. It earned him the highest honour in the Asia Pacific Region Service Advisor Competition.

The competition, initiated by JLR’s Asia Pacific Office, aims to recognise and celebrate service advisors who exemplify excellence in their field. Ibrahim’s unwavering commitment to customer satisfaction, coupled with his deep technical knowledge, made him a standout candidate.  Customer feedback played a crucial role in Ibrahim’s victory. A few of the glowing reviews Ibrahim received were;

“The service team was very professional and focused on fulfilling the need. I have worked with Ibrahim for the last 12 years, and his professionalism and commitment are highly commendable. It is one reason I remain with my service provider, the other being the excellent service experience.”

“I can contact my service advisor at any time for emergency assistance. I always get genuine feedback regarding my concerns. I have never lost any personal belongings that were in the vehicle during repairs and service.

“Fantastic experience! The staff was friendly and knowledgeable and kept me updated throughout the process. I’ll definitely be returning for future maintenance.”

Commenting on Ibrahim’s achievement, Shanesh Ratnaweerage, General Manager of aftersales and customer Service at Access Motors, expressed his pride, stating, “This achievement is not only a personal victory for Ibrahim but also a reflection of our team’s dedication to excellence. His success inspires us all to strive for the highest standards of service and customer satisfaction.”

Dialog brings ‘The Future.Today’ to life as Sri Lanka’s first Drone Countdown takes flight

Thilan Wijesinghe contributes to global South Blue Economy at ORF’s Cape Town Conversation

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.