ASUS launches AI-powered flagship ExpertBook Ultra in Sri Lanka

From left:  ASUS Vice President Commercial PC Sri Lanka, India and Nepal Dinesh Sharma, ASUS System Business Group APAC Commercial General Manager Vice President Rex Lee, and ASUS Sri Lanka Country Product Manager Medanka Mapalagama – Pic by Daminda Harsha Perera

ASUS has announced the Sri Lanka launch of the ASUS ExpertBook Ultra, the absolute industry flagship and a Copilot+ PC designed to enable CXOs and business leaders to achieve an ultra-state of mind where brilliance is born.

It features ultra-light design, elite cutting-edge AI-powered performance, vivid display, immersive audio, all day battery, ultimate typing experience, segment leading military grade durability, enterprise-grade security, super premium enterprise grade service support, and seamless expandability.

The ExpertBook portfolio is also expanded with B series (B3 and B5 models) and P series (P5 and P3 models) for high-performance AI productivity and future-proof scalability to meet the dynamic demands of enterprises and businesses across Sri Lanka. Powered by next-generation Intel Core Ultra Series 3 processor and AI-driven productivity, the new ExpertBook Ultra, B and P series business laptops are unified by the ASUS ‘Worry-Free Business Experience’ commitment, blending elite performance, enterprise security, military-grade durability, comprehensive connectivity and mobility, with Sri Lanka’s most comprehensive commercial support ecosystem.

The ASUS ExpertBook Ultra is ultra-portable flagship meticulously crafted from AZ31B magnesium-aluminum alloy, a material typically reserved for Aerospace and Formula 1 applications, with a Nano Ceramic surface with a 9H hardness rating. It is engineered to deliver an unprecedented balance of performance, durability, aesthetics, and user experience.

Defying the laws of physics, the ExpertBook Ultra seamlessly integrates the latest up to Intel Core Ultra X9 (Series 3) processor, an incredibly powerful GPU, an advanced NPU (50 TOPS), and ASUS ExpertCool Pro thermal technology into a single heterogeneous AI computing platform. It sustains up to 50W of consistent CPU performance under demanding workloads, in a featherlight chassis starting from just 0.99 kg, and only 10.9 mm thin. Combined with next-generation PCIe Gen 5 storage and ultra-high-speed LPDDR5X memory, this Copilot+ PC is engineered as a future-proof asset.

The ExpertBook Ultra also delivers an exceptional visual and audio experience. The 14-inch 3K 120Hz anti-glare touchscreen Tandem OLED display reaches up to 1,400 nits of brightness, producing stunning lifelike visuals and vibrant colours while consuming significantly less power than conventional OLED panels. Paired with a six-speaker Dolby Atmos audio system, the laptop offers immersive sound with crystal-clear voice quality for virtual meetings, presentations, and executive workflows.

Productivity is further augmented through a suite of AI-powered capabilities that simplify collaboration, improve communication and enable professionals to make the most of AI-assisted workflows. These include ASUS ExpertMeet, AI noise cancellation, intelligent camera enhancements, and support for next-generation AI experiences via ASUS MyExpert. Designed for professionals on the move, it combines all-day battery life, fast charging, Wi-Fi 7, and a full-range of business-ready physical ports, allowing users to remain productive without relying on additional adapters or accessories. Enterprise-grade security sits at the core with ASUS ExpertGuardian, providing biometric authentication, Microsoft Pluton integration, and hardware-level BIOS protection.

Complementing this flagship is the significantly expanded ExpertBook B and P series, featuring the ExpertBook P5, B5, P3 and B3 models tailored for organisations of all sizes. To provide ultimate power of choice for IT decision-makers, these models offer multiple chassis options in 14-inch and 16-inch display configurations.

Driven by up to Intel Core Ultra Series 3 processors with advanced NPU capabilities (50 TOPS), these versatile ExpertBook AI-powered models deliver massive scalability with support for up to 64GB DDR5 RAM and Dual SSD storage setups. Whether deployed for a high-growth startup or a global enterprise, the ExpertBook B and P series deliver a consistent ‘Worry-Free Business Experience’ anchored by US military-grade (MIL-STD 810H) durability, ASUS ExpertGuardian multi-layered security, 1-year McAfeeTM + Premium subscription and an industry-leading service network making the ExpertBook Series an ideal, resilient choice for enterprise use.

To provide the ultimate power of choice for IT decision-makers, these new ExpertBook models include multiple chassis options with 14-inch and 16-inch display configurations. These versatile AI powerhouses offer a wide range of processing options up to Intel Core Ultra Series 3 processor, incredibly powerful GPU and advanced NPU (50 TOPS), along with massive scalability with up to 64GB DDR5 RAM and Dual SSD support for storage.

ASUS APAC Head of Commercial PCs Rex Lee said: “At ASUS, our innovation is rooted in Design Thinking, i.e. Listening closely to modern professionals to solve real-world industry gaps. We recognised that business leaders were constantly forced to choose between ultra-light portability, sustained performance, and long battery life. With meaningful insights like this, we created the ExpertBook Ultra to eliminate that compromise entirely, setting a new benchmark for C-suite executives.”

“Sri Lanka accelerates into an AI-first era, we are proud to deliver a complete ‘Power of Choice’ across our new lineup powered by Intel Core Ultra Series 3 processors. From our flagship Ultra to the versatile ExpertBook B and P Series, we aim to empower Sri Lankan organisations with high-performance NPUs delivering up to 50 TOPS for seamless, secure, on-device AI collaboration. Above all, this entire lineup is anchored by our ‘Worry-Free Business’ promise, combining military-grade durability, enterprise security, and Sri Lanka’s most comprehensive local support ecosystem so businesses can scale with absolute confidence.”