Patali wants Sri Lanka presidential powers pruned, meets party leaders

ECONOMYNEXT — Sri Lanka opposition MP Patali Champika Ranawaka has presented a ‘common minimum progamme’ to President Ranil Wickremesinghe and representatives of the main opposition Samagi Jana Balawegaya (SJB), with a proposal to trim the executive powers of the president’s office to 2015 levels.

Titled “A Step Forward with Unity for Our Nation”, the 32-page document contains proposed short and long term solutions to Sri Lanka’s ongoing issues.

Among these is a proposal that reads “Revisiting and reducing the President’s executive powers to the levels observed in 2015, fostering a more balanced distribution of authority”.

Ranawaka, who is widely seen as harbouring ambitions of national leadership, recently left the SJB on whose ticket he contested and won the 2020 parliamentary election. Last year, he quit the Jathika Hela Urumaya (JHU) the nationalist party of which he was a founding member and subsequently its leader, to form a new centre-right party named the United Republic Front (URF).

Ranawaka met President Wickremesinghe on Saturday February 24. In a tweet after the meeting, the URF leader said the discussion was “fruitful”.

His party plans to discuss the program with all the political parties except the ruling Sri Lanka Podujana Peramuna (SLPP), which Ranawaka claimed is responsible for the current status of the country.

The President’s Media Division (PMD) also separately released a statement on the meeting.

“Recalling his open invitation to all political parties to unite under a common agenda for the country, regardless of political differences, President Wickremesinghe reiterated his willingness to embrace constructive proposals from all parties as part of nation-building efforts.

“Responding to queries about the scheduling of elections, he affirmed that the Presidential Election will proceed as scheduled, with the General Election anticipated to take place early next year,” the PMD said in a statement hours after the meeting.

Ranawaka’s meeting with SJB seniors on Monday was significant considering he had just recently made headlines for his public criticisms of SJB and opposition leader Sajith Premadasa, who was conspicuous by his absence at the meeting that otherwise looked cordial. (Colombo/Feb26/2024)