EDB–NOCU’s countrywide awareness campaign reaches Batticaloa

The National Organic Control Unit (NOCU) of the Sri Lanka Export Development Board (EDB) continued its mission to elevate Sri Lanka’s organic agriculture sector by successfully conducting the third phase of its 2025 national awareness program at Riveria Resort – Batticaloa on 8 July. The awareness seminar follows the earlier programs held in Jaffna and Matale that were highly beneficial to the participants. The one-day awareness program contained expert presentations and stakeholder discussions and drew over 75 participants from the Eastern Province, including farmers, entrepreneurs, and stakeholders in the organic value chain.

The occasion featured a comprehensive set of lectures by subject matter experts, offering practical and policy-level insights into the organic agriculture ecosystem. Eastern University Head of the Department of Crop Science at the Faculty of Agriculture Prof S. Sutharsan started the proceedings of the seminar by making the opening remarks while the technical sessions of the event began with the presentation by NOCU Assistant Director Vinoka Perera on “Principles of Organic Agriculture and Organic Farming Practices”. The participants got the opportunity to obtain valuable knowledge on organic food processing methods by NOCU Export Promotion Officer Lasith Jayawardana and they were also made aware of the market potential and latest trends associated with the organic agricultural exports by the EDB Assistant Director Madhurika Manikpura. In view of the important role played by online platforms in terms of reaching global consumers in the modern era, Commercial Bank Executive Officer Nadarajah Pirashanthan educated the audience aboutdigital marketing for organic products.

The afternoon session was devoted to disseminate information about the regulatory and certification landscape of the organic farming in Sri Lanka. The attendees were made of aware of the Sri Lankan Organic Standard (SLS 1324:2018) as well as the organic certification procedure in the country via the presentations of Vinoka Perera and Ceycert Ltd., Managing Director Sanjiv Manchanaike. The program concluded with an engaging interactive discussion session, followed by the closing remarks of the EDB Deputy Director P.M.M. Zameem.

To ensure the effectiveness of the awareness seminar, all the presentations were conducted together with real-time Tamil translation, enabling the participants to fully engage with the content. P. Mathurangani, a temporary Assistant Lecturer attached to Eastern University provided translation services throughout the proceedings.

NOCU stands committed to building national capacity by delivering knowledge, strengthening certification systems, and promoting sustainable practices with the goal of positioning Sri Lanka as a trusted source of organic products in global markets. Detailed and comprehensive information about Sri Lanka’s organic standards and certifications can be obtained from NOCU’s website – www.nocu.lk.