Hayleys Plantations’ Talawakelle Tea Estates champions impactful sustainability at UN Global Compact’s “Forward Faster Now”

Talawakelle Tea Estates PLC (TTE PLC), a Hayleys Plantations company, has played a prominent role in advancing sustainability at the UN Global Compact’s flagship event: Forward Faster Now – Asia and Oceania.

TTE PLC was among a select few companies invited to showcase their significant contributions to the global sustainability agenda and help inspire other corporates in the region to embrace similar practices. The company used the opportunity to demonstrate their innovations in circular economies, reforestation and energy management.

“Our focus on precision agriculture, water conservation, and integration of renewable energy sources into our broader operations is setting a new benchmark for our industry. We have systematically integrated sustainability into every facet of our business operations, from production to community engagement, ensuring a holistic and impactful approach,” TTE PLC Managing Director Dr. Roshan Rajadurai said.

In alignment with the UNGC’s Forward Faster Now framework, TTE PLC has set two ambitious targets for its operations. With regard to carbon emissions, TTE PLC has set a corporate science-based net-zero emissions reduction targets through the Science Based Targets initiative (SBTi) by 2050, in alignment with a 1.5°C pathway.

Secondly, TTE PLC aims to support a just transition into sustainable business models by addressing the social impacts of climate change mitigation and adaptation measures in partnership with key stakeholders, including workers, communities, and suppliers.

With investments exceeding Rs. 103.6 million in community development initiatives, TTE PLC continues to create shared value by positively impacting over 40,000 individuals across its estates. The company is also certified with the Mother and Child Friendly Seal for its responsible business practices, HerLead program for women empowerment, ensuring the welfare of female workers and their families. These accolades reflect TTE PLC’s dedication to both operational excellence and social responsibility, positioning it as a pioneer in the plantation industry.

These initiatives serve to uplift local communities, ensuring no one is left behind in the transition to an environmentally sustainable economy.

As a trailblazer in the plantation sector, TTE PLC is making significant strides in global climate action through its Regenerative Business Agenda 2030, aligned with the UN’s Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs). The company is on track to achieve its climate goals while driving long-term environmental and economic value through smart agricultural practices and renewable energy adoption.

The company’s focus on precision agriculture, renewable energy, and eco-friendly processes actively contributes to water conservation, reforestation, and carbon footprint reduction, all of which align with global sustainability goals. TTE PLC’s achievements, such as being the first-ever certified company for ecosystem restoration in Asia, demonstrating its commitment to environmental responsibility.