All about Billy of 2FORTY2 fame…

Referring to last Tuesday’s story ‘Maathra World Tour’ in the UK, a fan of Billy Fernando, of 2FORTY2 fame – Yohani Senaratne, who resides in the UK – sent me this note:

“What a spectacular evening it was with the musical genius Billy Fernando and his band 2FORTY2!

From the stage set up, sounds, to the lighting and background motions, everything was just on point and Billy kept the audience entertained, not just by his singing and dancing, but by making everyone laugh throughout the four- hour long show, with his witty sense of humour. We didn’t feel the time pass at all!

Billy is an amazingly gifted individual whom I personally had the privilege of working with, 24 years ago, on a Christian outreach project called Peace 2000.

His mission was to put together a music team from various denominations to perform in an outdoor venue, the Vihara Mahadevi Park, in Colombo, and sing God-centred songs to bless others. I sang as a backing vocalist, alongside his younger sister. He was around 16 then, but I’ll never forget his passion.

The musical abilities and the leadership qualities he displayed was awesome and he would bring his little brother, Bonjo, who was around seven years old then, to some of the rehearsals to fill in for drums.

I was blown away at his little brother’s drumming skills at that age! It was beautiful to see the camaraderie between the two brothers on stage many years on…it’s obvious they are from the same womb as Billy rightly said on his show!

He continued to pursue his music career with his Gospel band EZRA. As young adults, we would get together and attend their shows when they used to perform at various church venues back in the day. From there he went on to join B&S, first as their drummer…and the rest is history I guess!

Seeing Billy perform with his bandmates, on Sunday, October 6th, brought back many memories for me and I am so proud to see where he is now.

He hails from a talented family of seven siblings and parents who were veterans, not just for their singing, but also for their guitar and musical instrument manufacturing shop called Tennyson Guitars which they still run I believe in Sri Lanka.”

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.