Sri Lanka apparels to get duty free access to UK with Asian or African inputs

ECONOMYNEXT  – Sri Lanka apparels will get duty free access to the United Kingdom under rules unveiled on July 10, as part of a ‘Trade for Development’ initiative, the British High Commission in Colombo said.

While helping Sri Lanka, Nigeria and the Philippines export more goods to the UK, the liberalized rule of origin which allows more inputs from Asian and African countries to be used will also help British consumers and businesses access cheaper, good quality products.

Under the latest scheme, rules of origin for apparels were relaxed with effect from early 2026.

“The most significant positive change for Sri Lanka is that the rules of origin for the garments sector specifically will be liberalized,” the statement said.

“The changes will ensure that DCTS countries can now source their materials from a wider range of nations and will give manufacturers from countries such as Sri Lanka the opportunity to take advantage of 0% tariffs on garments.

The move is part of UK’s Developing Countries Trading Scheme, which replaced the GSP+, after Brexit.

The DCTS can be used by Sri Lanka exporters not just apparels.

“We want Sri Lanka to improve the utilisation of the UK’s Developing Countries Trading Scheme for a wider range of goods, not just garments,”  British High Commissioner to Sri Lanka Andrew Patrick said.

” With the Sri Lankan government’s ambition to grow exports, and with the simplification of rules of origin for other sectors too, we strongly encourage more exporters to explore how they can benefit from the preferences offered by the DCTS.”

At the moment the UK was the second largest destination country for Sri Lanka exports and apparel made up 60 percent.

The UK market volume was 675 million dollars a year, Yohan Lawrence, Secretary General of the Joint Apparel Association Forum (JAAF) said in the statement.

“JAAF has worked very closely with the UK Government to work on solutions to improve utilisation of the Scheme,” he said.

“We are delighted that, for garments, it will now be possible to source more raw material regionally and continue to qualify for duty free export to the UK. This will be a game-changer for our trade with the UK under the DCTS.

“This announcement will help secure employment opportunities and ensure sustainable growth in Sri Lanka by allowing us to compete on equal terms with our major competitors, and we expect exports to increase significantly when the new rules come into effect.”