PIM Green Digital Summit this Thursday

The Postgraduate Institute of Management (PIM), Sri Lanka’s pioneering business school, is set to host the landmark PIM Green Digital Summit 2026 on 26 February 2026. The summit is designed as a premier platform bringing together business leaders, academics, postgraduate and doctoral students, and professionals from across sectors to explore how sustainability and digital transformation are being meaningfully translated into practice.

The PIM Green Digital Summit 2026 aligns closely with PIM’s vision of being, “The Business School for the New World,” reflecting its commitment to shaping leaders who can navigate complexity, disruption, and global challenges with clarity and purpose. For over three decades, PIM has played a defining role in Sri Lanka’s leadership and professional landscape. The Institute has produced over 350 CEOs, 3,000 senior managers, and more than 30,000 trained professionals who are serving in key roles both locally and

The Green Digital Summit aims to create a single, integrated forum where ideas, experiences, and emerging best practices can be shared, debated, and refined. Participants will have the opportunity to engage with some of the finest minds in business and academia, gaining exposure to how organisations are rethinking value creation in a digital, lowcarbon future.

The oneday summit will feature a series of highimpact forums and discussions, with a strong emphasis on practical insights and forwardlooking perspectives. Sessions will be designed to bridge theory and practice, highlighting real-world applications of digital tools, data, and platforms in driving sustainable business models, as well as showcasing how sustainability principles are being embedded into strategy, operations, and leadership.

Held under the direction of director Dr Asanga Ranasinghe and organised by senior lecturer Tharindu Ameresekere, the event features keynote speakers including sustainability specialist LankaPay CEO Dr. Ravi Fernando, Deputy CEO Channa De Silva and Mastercard Country Manager Dinuka Perera.

By bringing together diverse voices at the intersection of sustainability and technology, the PIM Green Digital Summit 2026 seeks not only to inspire dialogue, but to catalyse action. It promises to be a significant milestone in the country’s journey towards building digitally enabled, sustainable organisations capable of competing and thriving in the new world.