Visa, NDB launch ‘Card Present Connect’ to transform POS acceptance in South Asia’s first

From left: NDB Head of Cards/Assistant Vice President Ashan Wikramanayake, Senior Vice President – Personal Banking and Customer Experience Sanjaya Perera, Visa Country Manager for Sri Lanka and Maldives Avanthi Colombage, and Senior Business Development Manager Sri Lanka Shavini Perera

Visa, a global leader in digital payments, together with National Development Bank PLC (NDB Bank), has launched Card Present Connect (CPC), an in-person digital payment acceptance solution powered by Cybersource, Visa’s open payment platform that supports both online and offline transactions.

As one of the leading global payment gateways within Visa Acceptance Solutions for businesses, Cybersource delivers secure payment processing that covers international card schemes. Through this collaboration, Visa extends a reliable payment solution to small and medium-sized businesses in Sri Lanka, making in-person card payments more efficient and secure via CPC.

This launch in Sri Lanka marks the first implementation of its kind in the Visa South Asia world. The new solution enables businesses to accept EMV chips, contactless, and mobile wallet payments using Android SmartPOS devices. For merchants, this means lower costs, faster onboarding, enhanced security, and access to both local and international customers - helping businesses compete globally and expand their presence across cashless economies.

For acquiring banks, this move delivers cost efficiency, faster go-to-market capabilities, and simplified deployment through Visa’s pre-integrated partner ecosystem. The solution eliminates the need for acquiring banks to build and maintain complex in-house payment infrastructure while ensuring full compliance and reliability.

Visa Country Manager for Sri Lanka and Maldives Avanthi Colombage said: “We are pleased to partner with NDB Bank to bring yet another breakthrough solution by Cybersource, that can accelerate the growth trajectory of the Sri Lankan business community. For SMBs, traditional POS terminals can be expensive, complex, or tied to long-term contracts. This in-person digital payment acceptance solution bridges that gap by streamlining merchant onboarding, improving operational efficiency and reducing infrastructure dependency for acquiring banks. By helping NDB Bank expand from online to in-person acceptance, we are democratising card acceptance and enabling merchants of all sizes with the tools, technology, and trust they need to thrive in an increasingly cashless economy. This collaboration reflects Visa and NDB Bank’s shared vision of advancing inclusive digital payments in Sri Lanka and building a financial ecosystem that sustains this agenda well into the future.”

NDB Senior Vice President, Personal Banking & Customer Experience Sanjaya Perera said: “Our expansion into in-person digital payments acceptance marks an important step in supporting local entrepreneurs and mid-market enterprises. With Visa’s global technology and NDB Bank’s strong local relationships, we are delivering the next generation of payment acceptance that is seamless, secure, and sustainable. This initiative empowers businesses with innovative solutions that simplify transactions, reduce operational costs, and enhance customer experience. Through collaborations like this, we reaffirm our commitment to driving financial inclusion and fostering economic growth for Sri Lanka’s vibrant business community.”