Former IGP C.D. Wickramaratne’s final rites to be held with full police honours

- Wickremaratne’s death a great loss to the country: Maithripala Sirisena

Colombo, July 20 (Daily Mirror) - The final rites of former Inspector General of Police (IGP) C.D. Wickramaratne will be held with full police honours at the Borella Cemetery this afternoon, Police Spokesman ASP F.U Wootler said.

​The 35th Inspector General of Police (IGP) of Sri Lanka, C.D. Wickramaratne, died at his residence in Malabe on Friday from a gunshot wound. Police currently suspect his death to be a suicide, as initial investigations revealed that he had reportedly shot himself using his security officer's firearm.

Meanwhile, police have launched a specialist forensic examination to determine how the former IGP sustained the gunshot wound.

His mortal remains have been sent to the Government Analyst for further examination.

Police also said that the former IGP's mobile phone had been taken into police custody and would be examined following a court order as part of the ongoing investigation.

The pistol believed to have been used in the shooting has also been taken into police custody and will be sent to the Government Analyst for forensic analysis.

Statements have been recorded from the former IGP's spouse and the three police officers assigned to his security.

His remains were placed at a private funeral parlour in Borella last morning, where members of the public, political figures, former state officials and senior police officers gathered to pay their final respects.

Former President Ranil Wickramesinghe and several other prominent figures were among those who visited the funeral parlour to pay tribute to the former police chief.

Meanwhile, former President Maithripala Sirisena described Wickremaratne’s death at the age of 63 as an even greater loss, saying a person at that age is at the peak of intelligence, maturity and ability to serve society.

Speaking to the media after paying his last respects, Sirisena expressed deep shock and sorrow over the sudden death of his close friend.

He recalled that Wickramaratne had been appointed as Inspector General of Police during his tenure as President.

Sirisena described the late former IGP as an honest, virtuous and humble individual who performed his duties with a calm and composed mind.

He said that despite the pressures and divisions often created by political leaders, Wickramaratne had the ability to navigate difficult situations without creating enemies. He also praised him for maintaining his composure during turbulent periods, including the mass protests known as the Aragalaya.

Recalling their most recent meeting, Sirisena said he had met Wickramaratne around two or three weeks ago along with their mutual friend, Ranga Kalansooriya. They had spent several hours talking and joking together.

Sirisena said Wickramaratne had expressed his intention to visit his home for a casual discussion on religion, society and international affairs, while avoiding political matters.

Sirisena said the country had lost an exemplary public servant, describing Wickramaratne as an outstanding example not only to the Police Department but to the entire public service.