‘Sri Lanka AI Week 2026’ launched with theme ‘AI Amplified’ by Ministry of Digital Economy and SLT-MOBITEL

Building on the success of Sri Lanka’s first-ever National AI Expo & Conference held last year, the Ministry of Digital Economy of Sri Lanka and SLT-MOBITEL, the National ICT Solutions Provider, announced ‘Sri Lanka AI Week 2026’, an initiative designed to transform the country’s Artificial Intelligence (AI) ambition into measurable impact.

Through thought-provoking discussions, showcases of cutting-edge AI innovations and collaboration among policymakers, businesses, researchers, startups and students, ‘Sri Lanka AI Week 2026’ aims to accelerate the development of a thriving AI ecosystem.

‘Sri Lanka AI Week 2026’, taking place from 28 September to 4 October 2026 across multiple venues in Colombo, will feature four landmark events such as the AI Leaders Night, an exclusive networking dinner for global leaders, policymakers, and C-suite executives and the AI Conference, a two-day forum of keynotes, panel discussions, and workshops on AI policy, enterprise transformation, and emerging technologies. The AI Expo, a multi-zone exhibition open to businesses, students, and the general public, will showcase concrete AI solutions covering key verticals.

Recognising excellence in AI among enterprises, startups, academia, and the public sector, the National AI Awards, will cover over 16 sectors from four categories including National Awards, Industry Excellence, Innovation & Future, and AI for Content. These awards will be presented to organisations and individuals driving real-world AI impact in Sri Lanka.

The press conference highlighted the growing importance of AI in driving Sri Lanka’s digital transformation and emphasised the significance of returning for a second year with an expanded national initiative. The discussions also reflected on the progress made since the inaugural edition and outlined how ‘Sri Lanka AI Week 2026’ will further accelerate AI adoption, foster collaboration, and translate the country’s AI ambitions into tangible and measurable outcomes.

The event was attended by Eng. Eranga Weeraratne, Deputy Minister of Digital Economy of Sri Lanka, Waruna Sri Dhanapala, Secretary to the Ministry of Digital Economy of Sri Lanka, Dr. Hans Wijayasuriya, Chief Advisor to the President on Digital Economy of Sri Lanka and Chairman of GovTech Sri Lanka, Dr. Mothilal De Silva, Chairman of SLT Group, and Riyaaz Rasheed, CEO of SLT-MOBITEL, alongside senior officials and representatives from the Ministry of Digital Economy, GovTech, and SLT-MOBITEL.

Historic Rs 9 billion share transaction by Commercial Credit and Finance boosts bourse

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.