INSEE Lanka powers ‘Build Sri Lanka Exhibition 2026’ as Corporate Sponsor

INSEE Lanka takes center stage as the Corporate Sponsor of the Build Sri Lanka Housing & Construction Exhibition 2026, organised by the Chamber of Construction Industry of Sri Lanka (CCI).

The exhibition will be held from 22-24 May 2026 at BMICH. Stakeholders representing different sectors of the construction industry and international participants will be present.

Eng. Thusith Gunawarnasuriya, Chief Executive Officer, INSEE Lanka said, “We are proud to be part of the Build Sri Lanka Exhibition 2026 as the Corporate Sponsor, reinforcing our role as a leader in the construction industry. Platforms such as these are vital in shaping the future of the sector, and INSEE is committed to driving innovation, quality, and sustainable growth for the nation.”

Visitors to the INSEE stall will experience the company’s full range of solutions, including the flagship brands INSEE Sanstha and Mahaweli Marine Plus Cement, the advanced mortar range and ready-mix concrete solutions.

Also, on display, ‘INSEE i2i’ - an open collaboration platform available to all industry stakeholders. INSEE i2i enables partners to develop innovative and sustainable cement and concrete-based solutions, and supports knowledge sharing, learning, and product testing in a collaborative environment.

For visitors, the INSEE experience is an opportunity to gain valuable insights into innovative construction solutions, understand best practices, and explore how modern materials can enhance performance and sustainability.

INSEE Lanka has been present in Sri Lanka for over 55 years. The company was the first to introduce Portland Composite Cement (PCC) in Sri Lanka, setting new benchmarks in strength, durability, and sustainability. INSEE’s product portfolio is backed by Environmental Product Declarations (EPDs) and certifications including the EcoLabel from the National Cleaner Production Centre (NCPC) Sri Lanka and the 5-Star Green Rating from the Green Building Council of Sri Lanka.