Singer Sri Lanka launches HONOR X9B

Singer Sri Lanka PLC recently marked a significant milestone with the grand unveiling of the newest smartphone models from HONOR.The event, hosted on February 22, 2024, at the Shangri-La Hotel, Colombo, showcased the technological prowess and innovative design of the HONOR X Series, underlining the flourishing partnership between Singer and HONOR. The event also celebrated the rapid success HONOR has enjoyed among Sri Lankan smartphone owners since having been introduced in April of last year.

“Our collaboration with HONOR is more than a partnership; it’s a shared journey towards excellence in technology accessible to all. The introduction of the HONOR X9b, along with the X7b and X8b, mirrors our dedication to innovation and quality. We are eager for the Sri Lankan consumers to experience the unmatched quality and value these models bring to the table,” stated Mahesh Wijewardene, CEO Singer Group, commenting on the launch of the new devices.

The launch event this year centered on the HONOR X9b, equipped with the pioneering Ultra-Bounce Anti-Drop Display technology. This feature has earned the device a “Five-Star Overall Drop Resistance” certification from SGS, an industry first, highlighting the brand’s commitment to blending innovation with durability as a hallmark of its promise to customers.

The event also showcased the HONOR X7b, characterized by its long-standing battery life and the aesthetically pleasing HONOR X8b, further expanding the diverse portfolio of devices offered by

“We are thrilled to introduce the HONOR X Series to Sri Lanka marking an important milestone in the synergy between HONOR and SINGER. The HONOR X Series promises a host of advanced features tailored to exceed the expectations of our customers. Our journey with SINGER has been instrumental in making cutting-edge technology accessible to everyone in Sri Lanka, and we look forward to continuing this partnership to bring forward-thinking and reliable smartphone solutions to our valued consumers,” commented Zeng Lexing, Country Manager, HONOR Sri Lanka.

Singer Sri Lanka Excels in SAFA Best Annual Report Awards 2022

SINGER rewards loyal customers with prizes worth over 1 million rupees

Singer Sri Lanka Crowned Most Valuable Consumer Brand – Retail 2023

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.