International Meeting of Chief Justices and Senior Justices on

I am deeply honoured to have been invited to participate in this International Meeting of Chief Justices and Senior Justices on the Bangalore Principles of Judicial Conduct.

It was in 1997 when, after about three decades in the legal profession, public service and academia, I was persuaded by a friend to come down from the ivory towers to join him in Berlin at Transparency International. That non-governmental organization, formed with assistance from the World Bank, was then in its formative years, and one of its principal objectives was to identify sectors that were vulnerable to corruption, and then to formulate strategies to combat such corruption.

I had barely settled down at Transparency International when credible evidence began to surface of corruption in judicial systems in many countries across the continents. For example, a household survey in Bangladesh revealed that 63% of those involved in litigation in the lower courts had paid bribes to court officials, judges, and even to the opponents’ lawyer. A Commission of Inquiry in Tanzania documented numerous instances of court staff, magistrates, and prosecutors soliciting or accepting bribes.

People who participated in public perception surveys considered the judiciary to be only somewhat less corrupt that the police. In Argentina, 57% said they felt that corruption was the main problem with the judiciary. In Honduras, three out of four believed the judiciary was corrupt. In Costa Rica, 54% believed that judicial decisions were subject to external “pressures”. A UNDP funded study in Peru found that three of four penal cases were influenced by corruption. According to the Geneva-based Centre for the Independence of Judges and Lawyers, out of 48 countries covered in its annual report for 1999, judicial corruption was pervasive in 30 countries.

In the early 1970s, as a young lawyer serving as Secretary for Justice in the Government of Sri Lanka, I saw and experienced, with considerable unease and sadness, how some serving judges could demean themselves and the sanctity of their office, in the pursuit of preferential treatment from the executive branch of government. When some of these efforts proved to be rewarding, it was difficult not to become sceptical. It was time for the illusions of youth to disappear.

Corruption in the judiciary, therefore, extends beyond conventional bribery. An insidious form of corruption arises from the interaction between the judiciary and the executive, and from the relationship between the judiciary and the legal profession. For example, the political patronage through which a judge may have acquired his office, a promotion, an extension of service, preferential treatment, or the promise of employment after retirement, gives rise to corruption when the executive makes demands on such judge.

Similarly, when a family member regularly appears before a judge, or when a judge selectively ignores sentencing guidelines in cases in which a particular counsel appears, or statistics reveal a high rate of decisions in favour of the executive, the conduct of the judge is almost certain to raise, in the minds of others, the suspicion that the judge is susceptible to undue influence in the discharge of his judicial duties.

Independence has for long been regarded as a fundamental requirement for a national judiciary. What is often overlooked is that judicial independence is not a privilege of judicial office. It is an essential pre-requisite for the protection of the people. Judicial independence is essential because it is the judiciary that stands between the government and the people, determining whether actions taken by public officials comply with the standards laid down by law.

It is the judiciary that stands between the individual and the powerful corporate sector, which is increasingly becoming the primary employer and producer of national wealth. The question, therefore, began to be asked how real that protection is if the evidence surfacing was an accurate reflection of the state of the judiciary. Was judicial independence being traded for money or other benefits? Was adherence to the principle of judicial independence, by itself, sufficient to ensure the delivery of justice?

It was against that background that my colleague at Transparency International, Jeremy Pope, and I convened a pilot workshop on “Strengthening Judicial Integrity” in October 1999 during the International Anti-Corruption Conference in Durban, South Africa. Its participants included judges, lawyers, legal academics, justice ministry officials, members of parliament, and human rights activists. From that workshop, which I had the privilege to chair, the message that came through clearly was the need to formulate and implement a concept of judicial accountability, without eroding the principle of judicial independence.

Accountability is a constitutional requirement in a democratic society. In such a society, every power holder, whether it be the legislature or the executive, is, in the final analysis, accountable to the people. Was there any reason why the judiciary, which is entrusted with the exercise of judicial power, should not, individually and collectively, be accountable for the due performance of the functions vested in it?

It had been argued that a judge is accountable only to the law and to the judge’s conscience. But, as Justice Michael Kirby, the longest serving member of the High Court of Australia, once observed, judges share the infirmities of other human beings. There is invariably, in most courts, a rude judge, a slow judge, an ignorant judge, a prejudiced judge, a sleeping judge, an absentee judge, and an eccentric judge.

The challenge, therefore, was to determine how the judiciary could be held to account in a manner that is consistent with the principle of judicial independence. How does one achieve the right balance between autonomy in decision-making and independence from external forces on the one hand, and accountability to the community on the other? My colleague and I agreed that these were issues that were best resolved by the judges themselves.

For that purpose, I initiated discussions with eight Chief Justices from four African and four Asian countries. All of them responded positively to the suggestion that a small group be established to address the issue of judicial accountability. These eight jurisdictions – Nigeria, Uganda, Tanzania, South Africa, Sri Lanka, Karnataka State in India, Bangladesh and Nepal – shared a common judicial tradition. Justice Michael Kirby of Australia, agreed to be the rapporteur, and Dato Param Cumaraswamy, the UN Special Rapporteur on the Independence of Judges and Lawyers, agreed to participate as an observer. The UN High Commissioner for Human Rights, Mary Robinson, designated the Chairperson of the UN Human Rights Committee and former Chief Justice of India, Justice Bhagwati, as her representative.

The choice of a chairperson to preside over a meeting of Chief Justices was a sensitive issue, but that was happily resolved when Judge Christopher Weeramantry, Vice-President of the International Court of Justice agreed to perform that task. At a crucial moment, Transparency International decided that the funds I had secured for the meeting would be more profitably spent on addressing corruption in the banking sector. Fortunately, the UN Centre for International Crime Prevention (now UNODC), which was about to launch a Global Programme Against Corruption, agreed enthusiastically to convene the preparatory meeting in Vienna in April 2000.

At that first meeting, the Judicial Integrity Group (as it is now known) agreed that judges (unlike ministers or civil servants) should be accountable to the community they serve through their absolute adherence to a set of judicial values. They believed that by adopting and enforcing appropriate standards of judicial conduct, the judiciary would be able to earn and retain the respect of the community. They agreed that this statement of core judicial values should be enforced by the judiciary without the intervention of the executive and legislative branches of government. They also believed that transparency at every critical stage of the judicial process will enable the community, especially through its legal academics, civil society and a free media, to judge the judges.

At the request of the Group, I prepared a draft statement of principles of judicial conduct, identifying Independence, Impartiality, Integrity, Propriety, Equality, and Competence and Diligence as being the core judicial values. I did not attempt to reinvent the wheel. Instead, I drew on rules and principles which were already articulated in national codes of conduct (wherever they existed) and in regional and international instruments. At its second meeting which was hosted by the Chief Justice of the High Court of Karnataka in Bangalore in 2001, that document was carefully scrutinized, analysed, criticised, revised, and finally adopted by the Group, and became known as the Bangalore Draft Code of Judicial Conduct.

I should mention a major setback that occurred when arrangements were being made for the Bangalore Meeting. The new Italian head of UNODC withdrew support for the project, arguing that if there was corruption in the judiciary, it was a problem not for judges but for the police. Fortunately, we were able to convince the Department for International Development (DfID) in the United Kingdom that our project was one which they ought to support, and which they quite enthusiastically did for the next four years.

Over the next 20 months, the Bangalore Draft was widely disseminated among senior judges of both common law and civil law systems in over 75 countries. It was presented to, and discussed, at several judicial conferences. It was translated into the national languages of Central and Eastern European countries and reviewed by judges’ associations and supreme courts of these countries. The Consultative Council of European Judges, which functions under the Council of Europe and represented at that time the judicial systems of 30 countries, commissioned an expert study of the Bangalore Draft. Thereafter, at a meeting held in Strasbourg in June 2002, to which the UN Special Rapporteur and I were invited, it conducted a full and frank discussion from the perspective of the civil law system and then adopted a comprehensive report on specific provisions of the draft.

At the end of the consultation process, in the light of the comments and criticisms received, and with a view to ensuring that the final document faithfully reflected the position of civil law jurisdictions as well, the Bangalore Draft was revised. In November 2002, at a meeting held at the Peace Palace at The Hague, Netherlands – the seat of the International Court of Justice, the revised draft was placed before a Round Table Meeting of Chief Justices drawn from the civil law system, and at which Judges of the International Court of Justice also participated. The civil law jurisdictions represented were Brazil, Czech Republic, Egypt, France, Mexico, Mozambique, Netherlands, Norway and the Philippines. The Judges of the International Court of Justice present were drawn from Madagascar, Hungary, Germany, Sierra Leone, United Kingdom, Brazil, Egypt and the USA The final draft that emerged from that meeting – the Bangalore Principles of Judicial Conduct – is the document that we have today.

In April 2003, the Bangalore Principles were annexed to the annual report presented to the 59th Session of the UN Commission on Human Rights by the UN Special Rapporteur on the Independence of Judges and Lawyers, Dato Param Cumaraswamy. In a resolution which was unanimously adopted, the Bangalore Principles “were noted” and brought “to the attention of Member States, the relevant UN organs and intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations for their consideration”.

Following the adoption of the Bangalore Principles at the Hague Meeting, several other initiatives were launched, with the assistance of the Vienna-based UNODC. National surveys of court users and other stakeholders in the justice system were conducted in Nigeria, Uganda and Sri Lanka to identify systemic weaknesses. A Code of Conduct for Judicial Employees was drafted. Most significantly, with the assistance of GTZ, it was decided to draft a Commentary on the Bangalore Principles. It was a task which I undertook. The product was a 175-page document which also included a section on the cultural and religious traditions that underpin the contemporary concept of judicial integrity.

By 2006, UNODC was actively involved in efforts to secure the endorsement of the Bangalore Principles by the UN General Assembly. With that objective, it forwarded the Bangalore Principles to all the Member States of the UN, seeking their comments and observations. A resolution was co-sponsored by the Governments of Egypt, France, Germany, Nigeria and the Philippines, and submitted to the UN Commission on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice. That resolution invited Member States to encourage their judiciaries to take into consideration the Bangalore Principles when developing rules with respect to the professional and ethical conduct of members of the judiciary; and requested UNODC to convene an open-ended inter-governmental expert group to review the Bangalore Principles and the Commentary, taking into account the views expressed and the revisions suggested by Member States. That resolution was unanimously adopted and was thereafter adopted without a vote by the UN Economic and Social Council whose annual report was unanimously adopted by the United Nations General Assembly later that year.

In March 2007, UNODC convened the meeting of the Inter-Governmental Expert Group consisting of over a hundred participants. At that two-day meeting, held in Vienna and presided over by Judge Weeramantry and Chief Justice Pius Langa of South Africa, the draft commentary was considered in detail and amendments were agreed upon. The Commentary on the Bangalore Principles was thereafter published by UNODC in the official UN languages, and has since been re-published by a few national judiciaries in their own languages.

In 2010, the Judicial Integrity Group met in Lusaka, on the invitation of the Chief Justice of Zambia, and agreed on Measures for the Effective Implementation of the Bangalore Principles. I had the opportunity of incorporating these Measures in the UNODC publication An Implementation Guide and Evaluative Framework in respect of Article 11 of the UN Convention Against Corruption (UNCAC). That Article imposes an obligation on states parties to take measures to strengthen judicial integrity, and cites a code of judicial conduct as one such measure.

Meanwhile, UNODC has launched a Global Judicial Integrity Network to promote the implementation of the Bangalore Principles and Article 11 of UNCAC. It is an initiative that seeks to provide capacity-building support, advisory services, tools, networking opportunities and other relevant resources to national judiciaries.

Another significant instrument which complements the Bangalore Principles is the Istanbul Declaration on Transparency in the Judicial Process which I had the pleasure of preparing at the request of the Court of Cassation of the Republic of Turkey. It was reviewed and approved at three conferences of Chief Justices of the Asian-Pacific region, the Balkan region, and finally from North and South America, the Caribbean, Europe, and Africa.

Finally, in 2016, a 16-year journey ended when the United Nations formally included the Bangalore Principles of Judicial Conduct in its Compendium of UN Standards and Norms relating to the Administration of Justice.

It is now 24 years since the Bangalore Principles were adopted, and almost 20 years since the Commentary was published. During this period, there have been several technological and social developments that impact on judicial conduct.

= It has been questioned whether the six judicial values are exhaustive, or whether there are others as well. We are now considering whether “courage” and “empathy” ought to be recognised as additional values.

= It has been suggested that some serious social issues, such as sexual harassment, sexual misconduct, and “sextortion” have not been adequately addressed or not at all.

= The use of social media by judges can impact on judicial integrity and public confidence in the judiciary. Therefore, should their use be regulated, and if so, to what extent?

= While artificial intelligence may contribute to the improvement of access to justice and case-management, what steps are necessary to ensure that justice is not thereby dehumanized?

= Should a judge enjoy personal immunity from civil suit for conduct in the exercise of a judicial function, even if it can be established that the judge has acted mala fide?

I hope this Conference will be able to address these sensitive issues.

In conclusion, I wish to highlight two matters. The first is to emphasize that the strength and, indeed, the legitimacy of the Bangalore Principles and related instruments are derived from the fact that they were crafted by judges, based on their own experience as judges and are intended to be utilized by judges who form the core of the justice system.

Finally, I wish to note what a humbling experience it was for me, when preparing the draft Principles, and thereafter the draft Commentary, to learn that these core judicial values and principles and even detailed statements of their applicability were to be found –

in the texts of ancient Egypt and in Hindu Law in or around 1500 BC;

in the Twelve Tables of Rome in 450 BC (which contains the injunction that “The setting of the sun shall be the extreme limit of time within which a judge must render his decision”);

in the legal systems that flourished in Africa at the same time as they did in Greece and Rome;

in the writings of Jewish scholars in or about the 12th century AD;

The judicial values are not only global; they are also eternal.

Appointment to the National Salaries Commission and many others adding to already heavy work load

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.