Fuel: Feints, hooks and rhetoric

The fuel price revision on the eve of the reintroduction of the QR-based fuel quota system the other day was only a feint, and the killer hook followed on Saturday, when massive fuel price hikes sent the public reeling. Curiously, Cabinet Spokesman and Minister Dr. Nalinda Jayatissa has said that despite the latest fuel price increases, “the Treasury is still bearing a cost of Rs. 100 per litre of diesel and Rs. 20 per litre of petrol, resulting in an estimated monthly subsidy expenditure of approximately Rs. 20 billion”. This claim lacks clarity. If it is true that fuel is still subsidised, the government ought to present a cost analysis based on landed costs of imported fuel, refining or processing costs, if any, administrative and distribution costs, dealer margins, and government taxes and levies. Mere words won’t do.

A statement made by President Anura Kumara Dissanayake on fuel pricing, in Parliament last Friday, runs counter to the Cabinet Spokesman’s aforesaid claim. What one gathered from the President’s speech was that the government would increase fuel prices in such a way as to make them cost-reflective. The President said the Ceylon Petroleum Corporation (CPC) accounted for 57% of the country’s fuel supply, and if it had been the sole supplier, world market price fluctuations could have been managed by offsetting current losses with future profits.

He said the private sector now controlled 43% of the market, and its position was that if retail prices did not reflect the current landed costs of fuel, it would stop imports. Emphasising that the contribution of the private sector was essential to maintaining the national fuel supply, the President noted that the private companies would participate only if they could sell fuel at cost-reflective prices. In other words, his position was that it was not possible to subsidise fuel. So, if the fuel prices determined by the CPC are not cost-reflective, due to subsidies, they will compel the private companies in the fuel trade to vote with their feet. It will be interesting to see whether they will do so. They have already matched the CPC prices.

Meanwhile, there are some measures that the government can adopt immediately to grant relief to the public. As we argued in last Saturday’s comment, the government should seriously consider suspending the loss-recovery levy of Rs. 50 per litre embedded in fuel prices, and imposing it again, if at all, when oil prices stabilise in the world market. This levy must also be replaced with a special commodity tax, which can be imposed on the private companies engaged in the fuel trade; at present they do not transfer the proceeds from loss-recovery levy to the Treasury, unlike the CPC, according to some former Petroleum ministers. Expanding the base of the loss-recovery levy in the form of a cess will help reduce its quantum. Surprisingly, this issue has not been taken up in Parliament.

There is also a pressing need for a car-pooling system to address the issue of soaring fuel prices and low-occupancy vehicles on the road. There are some car-pooling platforms in Sri Lanka, but they are not widely used. Car-pooling apps and similar services operate across Europe, Asia and Latin America in countries, such as France, Germany, Spain, Italy, Belgium, Poland, the UK, Turkey, India, Russia, Brazil and Mexico.

Successive governments have not cared to increase the country’s strategic petroleum reserves. The incumbent dispensation has failed to be different. In April 2020, world oil prices turned negative for the first time in history, with the oil producers paying buyers to remove the commodity owing to a fear that they would run out of storage facilities. Sri Lanka could not benefit from that windfall. The SLPP was in power at the time. If the Trinco oil tank farm had been repaired and made operational by then, the CPC would have been able to make huge profits and even turn itself around.

Speaking in Parliament, President Dissanayake recently lamented the limited oil storage facilities in Sri Lanka. No country can absorb oil price shocks unless it maintains strategic petroleum reserves. Only a few of the 99 oil tanks in Trincomalee have been developed. The Indian Oil Company (IOC) has been given 14 tanks, and the CPC 24 tanks, which remain unused; 61 tanks are to be developed under a joint venture between the CPC and the IOC. Each tank has a capacity of about 10,000 MT. There are no signs of the CPC-owned tanks in Trinco being made operational any time soon despite the JVP-led NPP’s election pledge to rehabilitate them fast as a national priority. Rhetoric is no substitute for strategic planning.

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.