CEAT develops new original equipment radial tyre for DIMO’s Tata Xenon Yodha

Tata Xenon Yodha single cab pick-up trucks assembled by DIMO will ride on purpose-developed CEAT light truck radial tyres manufactured in Sri Lanka, in a coming together of two performance-driven automotive brands via a significant original equipment (OE) partnership.

With this synergy, CEAT Kelani Holdings has manufactured a new radial tyre for the locally assembled Tata Xenon Yodha by DIMO, to meet the performance specifications of the vehicle, and the high expectations of users.

The CEAT 215/75 R16 WINMILE X3 R tyre is built for Low Hysteresis Loss, reducing the energy loss associated with carbon black reinforced rubber. This results in reduced rolling resistance, less wear and tear and a smoother ride. The use of a high mileage compound and improvements in the footprint shape of the tyre also promise extra mileage.

Considering the Tata Xenon Yodha’s payload capacity of 1250 kg, the new tyre is built to the 90D Ply Line Concept with balanced Rim Flange Pressure to ensure higher loadability, while a two-layer cover strip and a low-deformation belt contribute to improved durability, complimenting the vehicle’s attractive cost to performance proposition, the Company said.

“Every new Original Equipment Manufacturer partnership we enter into provides us an opportunity to develop products that meet new performance benchmarks,” CEAT Kelani Chief Operating Officer Shamal Gunawardene said. “Since CEAT has its own R&D as well as testing facilities in Germany and India, and our USP is our ability to manufacture products for local road conditions, these partnerships lead to continuous improvements that benefit the overall market, while supporting domestic value addition.”

CEAT is also the official tyre for Tata Ace HT series compact trucks, popularly known in Sri Lanka as “DIMO Batta,” which are assembled by DIMO in collaboration with India’s largest automobile manufacturer TATA Motors.

Notably, CEAT is the only locally manufactured tyre brand to be IATF 16949:2016 certified by the International Automotive Task Force (IATF) for compliance with the International Standard for Automotive Quality Management Systems.

Toastmaster Division B and G Joint Division Conference lights up District 82

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.