Success for Seven Notes …in Dubai

The weather in Dubai, the past few weeks, has been so unpredictable, but it has now improved and the entertainment scene is brightening up, once again, and with the spotlight being focused on Sri Lankans – music, fashion shows, etc.

News has come my way of a band, made up of all Sri Lankans, based in Dubai, who are doing extremely well…with their brand of music – a combination of western and oriental.

They call themselves Seven Notes and the musicians who make up this outfit are Nishan Jayasinghe (leader – drums), Niluk Uswaththa (bass guitar), Desh Munasinghe (lead guitar), Sisira Sajith (keyboards), Diluksha Madushan (percussion), Krishiy Young (female vocalist) and Dahaam Fernando (male vocalist).

According to bassist Niluk Uswaththa, although they operate as a seven-piece outfit, they have also got a newcomer, Rocky Jerom, doing the needful for them, as a singer.

Seven Notes are seen in action at Sri Lankan events, in Dubai, including dances and charity shows.

Bassist Niluk Uswaththa…now doing it with Seven Notes in Dubai

Bassist Niluk’s musical journey began in 2006, marking the inception of an eventful career that has seen him in action in many parts of the world, as well, including Italy, Denmark, Canada and the Middle East.

Starting as a bass guitarist, his early days were with bands like Mahinda Silva with Superstars, Saman and the Clan, Classic Boys, and Yes, from Panadura.

His contributions then extended to Rajiv Sebastian with Rajiv & the Clan, where he played a pivotal role in backing numerous artistes within the industry.

Niluk was with Rajiv & The Clan, from 2009 to 2021, and he showcased his skills not only in live performances but also in studio recordings, notably collaborating with Rajiv & the Clan on Yohani De Silva’s ‘Halmassa Man.’

He was also in the spotlight on TNL, Derana TV, Sirasa TV, Swarnawahini, and Rupavahini, on several occasions.

In 2020, Niluk marked a milestone with the release of his debut original song, titled ‘Mathakada,’ with lyrics provided by Buddhika Athapaththu, while Niluk himself did the melody.

He also has a channel on YouTube – NILUK USWATHTHA – where he does the needful as vocalist, composer, and lyricist. This certainly marked a new chapter in his artistic journey, showcasing his versatility and creativity as a musician.

Niluk moved to Dubai in 2021 and, alongside his musical endeavours with Seven Notes, he is also into event planning, and performs, as a solo artiste, as well, at various club events, across the city of Dubai.

Will Rajapaksas support help or hurt Prez Ranil’s election chances?

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.