SLANZBC takes Sri Lankan business delegation to Australia

A business delegation to Australia led by the Ceylon Chamber’s Sri Lanka–Australia–New Zealand Business Council (SLANZBC) opened new avenues for trade, investment and institutional cooperation, following engagements with Australian parliamentarians, government agencies, trade bodies and the business community in Canberra, Melbourne and Sydney.

Undertaken in collaboration with the High Commission of Sri Lanka in Australia, the delegation included representatives from the technology and AI, martech, venture capital, fisheries and logistics sectors, with discussions focused on areas where businesses in both countries could build stronger commercial connections.

In Canberra, the delegation met with Federal parliamentarians, including Hon. Cassandra Fernando MP, Chair of the Australia–Sri Lanka Parliamentary Friendship Group, as well as representatives of Austrade, DFAT and the Australian Chamber of Commerce and Industry.

Discussions covered Australia’s trade priorities, Sri Lanka’s emerging business capabilities and the role of diaspora and commercial networks in expanding bilateral trade. A potential reciprocal trade mission was also discussed.

In Melbourne, the delegation met with Global Victoria and Invest Victoria, as well as the Food and Beverage Association and the Australia Sri Lanka Business Council, with discussions covering trade, investment, food and beverage, technology and other areas of commercial cooperation. The Melbourne programme also included a cocktail event, providing an opportunity for delegates to connect with members of the Australian business community and explore potential areas for collaboration.

The visit also included a networking session in Sydney, organised with the Chartered Accountants in Sri Lanka – Australia Chapter, connecting delegates with members of the Sri Lankan and Australian business communities.

President of SLANZBC Chandana Amaradasa, said the visit provided an opportunity to reconnect with Australia’s government and business communitywhile identifying areas for continued engagement. He noted that the discussions would give the SLANZBC a basis to pursue sector-specific cooperation, reciprocal missions and stronger business connections between the two countries.