Sri Lanka still believe semis within reach at T20 World Cup

June.26 - Belief remains high in the Sri Lanka camp ahead of their final group match at the T20 World Cup against Scotland.

Sri Lanka batter Harshitha Samarawickrama still believes her side can qualify for the knockout stages of the ICC Women's T20 World Cup.

While Sri Lanka currently sit in fourth place in Group B ahead of their fixture against Scotland in Manchester on Friday, there is still an outside chance the island nation can qualify for the knockout stages should results fall their way over the next few days.

The first part of Sri Lanka's equation is to make sure they defeat Scotland at Old Trafford and by some margin too, with the side needing to improve their net run rate substantially if they are any chance of overtaking the West Indies and New Zealand and reaching the final four.

While Samarawickrama knows the odds are stacked against her side, the left-hander said her teammates will push hard to stay in contention.

“In the 2024 World Cup, we didn't play good cricket,” Samarawickrama said.

“This year, we have played really good cricket. We won against New Zealand, which was a great achievement in Sri Lankan cricket.

“Scotland are one of the best upcoming teams, so it's a great challenge for us.

“You can't undermine any team in this World Cup, everybody's playing good cricket.

“We are going to take it one step at a time, make sure we win first, and then think about the net run rate, but we believe we can do it.”

If Sri Lanka are to defeat Scotland and get that net run rate boost they require they will be hoping they can get another strong performance from skipper Chamari Athapaththu after her stunning century against Ireland in Bristol last start.

Athapaththu hit an unbeaten 106* from just 61 deliveries in a Player of the Match performance as Sri Lanka kept their semi-final hopes alive at the T20 World Cup and Samarawickrama admitted she remains in awe when playing alongside her inspirational captain.

“She's a living legend in Sri Lankan cricket. She plays really good cricket, and she’s a role model for us.

“She always shares her own knowledge and it’s a great honour to play with her.” - ICC