SEC and CSE hosts Investor Forum in Vavuniya

The Securities and Exchange Commission of Sri Lanka (SEC) in collaboration with the Colombo Stock Exchange (CSE) conducted their first Investor Forum for this year in Vavuniya on Feb. 17 with an event designed to raise awareness of stock market opportunities, investor education and investor protection, a CSE news release said.

The event attracted over 130 participants, which included both existing and potential investors, providing valuable insights, the release said.

Mr. Shanmukananthan Sabananthan, the Branch Manager of the CSE Jaffna, delivered a basic introduction to investing at CSE, including the process of investing as well as the pros and cons of Stock Market investment. A session to create awareness on the CSE Mobile App was conducted by Mr. Nathuram Sivarajah from the Colombo Stock Exchange.

Furthermore, an analysis on the Sectoral Performance & Market Opportunities was presented by Mr. Arumainayagam Visaahan, Research Analyst, Asha Securities Ltd.

A panel discussion was held with the participation of Mr. Sabananthan, Mr. Visaahan, and Mr. Imran Ahamed, Senior Assistant Manager of External Relations, SEC, providing an opportunity for participants to clarify any doubts from the panelists.

The participants were also given the opportunity to meet Investment Advisors from stock brokerage firms.

“The SEC and CSE have planned more investor forums this year in locations such as Dambulla, Nuwara Eliya, Ambalantota, Ratnapura, Gampaha, Matara and Colombo, in order to create awareness about investor education and protection whilst highlighting the importance of financial literacy,” the release concluded.

ComBank stays on growth trajectory in 2023 with notable Q4 performance

Coventry University and IIHS collaborates to offer Bachelors in Biomedical Sciences degree

CSE launches version3 of its Business Intelligence Dashboard – CSE Market IQ (MIQ)

Positive investor sentiment eludes CSE in the absence of macroeconomic support

CSE partners with SLIM to promote capital market education among students

Absence of market-driven activities stalls CSE; negative conditions manifest in politics

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.