SL’s High Commissioner  to Pakistan presents credentials

High Commissioner of Sri Lanka to Pakistan, Rear Admiral Fred Senavirathne (Retd.) presented his Letters of Credence to the President of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan, Asif Ali Zardari on 22 August, at Aiwan – e-Sadr (Presidency), Islamabad.

During the proceeding of the ceremony, the High Commissioner was escorted by the protocol of the MoFA from the High Commission premises to the Presidency. The credentials ceremony featured a Guard of Honour by a smartly turned-out contingent of the Armed Forces which was followed by the presentation of credentials and a courtesy call on the President of Pakistan.

Following the presentation of credentials, President Asif Ali Zardari extended a warm welcome and his congratulations to High Commissioner Fred Senevirathne on his new assignment. The President also emphasised the need to further strengthen bilateral cooperation between Pakistan and Sri Lanka. During the discussion, the President fondly recalled his visit to Sri Lanka and expressed his willingness to visit again in the near future.

The High Commissioner Fred Senevirathne conveyed the warm greetings of the President Anura Kumara Disanayake and his intention to explore new areas of cooperation between Sri Lanka and Pakistan and further enhance the existing ties between the two countries. In particular, Sri Lanka’s keen interest in further diversifying and deepening trade, economic and defence ties with Pakistan were highlighted.

Minister, A. Christy Ruban and Minister Counsellor (Defence), Brigadier G.A.R.K. Gunaratne of the Sri Lanka High Commission in Islamabad accompanied High Commissioner Senevirathne to the ceremony.

High Commissioner Fred Senevirathne is a retired naval officer who began his military career in 1985 and served the Sri Lanka Navy for 34 years. Commissioned as a Sub-Lieutenant in the Navy’s newly formed infantry unit in 1987, he rose through the ranks to hold various key staff and command positions, culminating in his role as the Commandant of the Naval Infantry at the time of his retirement in August 2020.

He has undergone professional training in Pakistan, India, Bangladesh, and China, and has participated in seminars and workshops in India, Qatar, Indonesia, and the USA. He holds a Master’s degree in Defence Studies from the University of Kelaniya and completed an advanced training program at Huaqiao University in China.

High Commissioner Senevirathne has been decorated with the Commander’s Commendation, Vishista Seva Vibhushanaya (VSV), and Uttama Seva Padakkama (USP) for his distinguished service and dedication to the nation.