Softlogic Life sweeps board at SLIM Digis 2024 becoming most awarded brand along with coveted Grand Prix

Further cementing its position as the most innovative insurer that is close to the heartbeat of the nation, Sri Lanka’s second largest life insurer Softlogic Life Insurance PLC took home nine awards at the SLIM Digis 2.4 Awards held on Oct 29, including the top most award of the night “The Grand Prix, a company news release said.

This top award which was won by Softlogic Life created a first for the insurance industry, which was to recognize the creativity, innovation and impact of its trailblazing and innovative ‘Legends’ Campaign. Additionally, the company won four Golds, three Silvers and a Bronze for ‘Dengeez’, Legends’ and ‘Sri Lanka’s Inspiring Crowd sourced Christmas Tree of Hope’ campaigns.

The award-winning ‘Legends’ campaign saw Softlogic Life launch Sri Lanka’s first-ever artificial intelligence (AI) TV commercial, recreating four iconic music legends—H.R. Jothipala, Milton Mallawarachchi, Clarence Wijewardena, and Sunil Perera—using deepfake technology. In a creative and bold move, the commercial featured these beloved artists, all of whom were also “Dads,” emphasizing that life insurance provides a safety net and peace of mind during uncertain times.

Softlogic Life conveys a message of support and reassurance creatively, letting viewers know that they are not alone in navigating these challenging times. performing the iconic ‘Leda Leda’ tune while expressing empathy for the financial challenges Sri Lankans face during troubled economic times, dominating digital platforms, the ‘Legends’ campaign earned Softlogic Life the prestigious Grand Prix award, along with two Golds for ‘Best Use of AI Technologies’ and ‘Cross Media Integration,’ and a Silver for ‘Best Digital Marketing Campaign in Insurance.’

Another set of accolades also came in for the ‘Dengeez’ campaign, which garnered widespread attention by creatively using reverse psychology to raise dengue awareness, which garnered significant attention and widespread discussion among Sri Lankans. The campaign had a creative twist that said not to prevent dengue but to spread it. The use of reverse psychology worked creatively on Sri Lankans who were sensitized to year-long dengue communications. The campaign’s catchy music video humorously encouraged the public to create breeding grounds, urging action against dengue in a fresh, memorable way. Its impact earned Softlogic Life the Gold Award for CSR, Purpose-Driven Digital Marketing, a Silver for Best Use of Digital Creative Content, and a Bronze for Best Digital Marketing Campaign in Insurance.

Softlogic Life also won another Silver Award for Cross Media Integration for the ‘Sri Lanka’s Inspiring Christmas Tree of Hope’ campaign, the country’s first crowd-sourced Christmas tree made from vegetable plants. Starting with Softlogic Life distributing seeds for home gardens, the campaign culminated in a massive Christmas tree assembled at Galle Face Roundabout, Colombo 1. Commenting on these wins, Softlogic Life Managing Director, Iftikar Ahamed said, “Our wins at SLIM Digis reflects our commitment to strategically leveraging innovation to build stronger connections with our communities and address real challenges. From pioneering AI in local advertising to impactful, purpose-driven campaigns, we aim to set new benchmarks in Sri Lanka’s digital landscape.

“This ethos of ours is not only reflected through our communication but also through everything we do. We have in a short span of five years become the youngest insurance brand in Sri Lanka that has challenged decades old giants and moved four market places to become the second largest life insurer in Sri Lanka while also claiming our spot as the market leader in health insurance.”

Expressing her views, Softlogic Life Head of Marketing, Chamindri Pilimatalauwe said, “These remarkable achievements at SLIM Digis 2024 are a testament to the power of creative collaboration and strategic innovation. We are incredibly grateful to our core agency partners —Mullen Lowe, Digibrush, Shift Integrated, New Media Solutions and Third Shift Media whose dedication helped bring these ambitious campaigns to life.

“Together, we have pushed the boundaries of insurance and digital engagement in Sri Lanka, creating impactful narratives that resonate with the heart of our nation. This recognition fuels our commitment to further elevate our approach, blending purpose with creativity to engage meaningfully and in ways that are relevant for today and to deliver value in ways that resonate deeply with the people we serve.”

Dilip Fonseka of Ceylon Pharma College wins ‘Revolutionary Thinker’ Award

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.