CPC tried to collect dues, up to current gov to follow through: Former minister

ECONOMYNEXT – The Ceylon Petroleum Corporation had taken steps to interdict officials who had failed to recover dues, and it’s now up to the current Government to follow through with the process and recover the lost revenue and pass down the benefit of the court decision to the consumers, former Minister of Power and Energy has said.

Kanchana Wijesekera issued a clarification on a newspaper article that “the previous Government of President @RW_SRILANKA have failed to recover due revenue from the Petroleum Dealers.”

Wijesekera said when he assumed duties in April 2022, instructions were given to CPC to recover due revenue from lease agreements, rentals and dealer margins from the decisions which were approved by the CPC board in 2006 and not implemented until 2014.

“The Ministry instructed CPC in 2022 to recover the revenue that was due from 2014. When CPC started recovering in 2022 the Petroleum Dealers Association prevented CPC the recovery with an interim order against the decision.

“After 2 years of legal battles, on the 30th of August 2024 the High Court of Civil Appeals dismissed the order and the appeal and paved the way for CPC to recover lost revenue.

“In the meantime CPC appointed a committee to probe the officials who had failed to recover dues over the last 10 years.

“The investigation report with the recommendations was handed over to the CPC on the 11th of September 2024.

“Accordingly the CPC has taken necessary steps to interdict officials named and steps to file legal action against the rest. Since the interdiction took place during the election period, the approval was required from the election commission to interdict the officials.

“It’s now up to the current Government of President @anuradisanayake to follow through with the process and recover the lost revenue and pass down the benefit of the court decision to the consumers.” (Colombo/Sep30/2024)

A Misleading & false headline carried by the Aruna Newspaper that the previous Government of President @RW_SRILANKA have failed to recover due revenue from the Petroleum Dealers are circulated on social media.

In April 2022 when I assumed duties at the Ministry… pic.twitter.com/S7IuBhs6z6