Flora Tissues earns prestigious Superbrand status for second time

Flora Tissues, Sri Lanka’s leading soft disposable tissue brand under Pee Bee Management Services (Pvt) Ltd, was conferred Superbrand status for 2025. This recognition is their second time win, solidifying its position as the nation’s most trusted household name in the tissue category.

The prestigious Superbrand status, conferred by the global Superbrands organisation following an independent evaluation of brand strength, consistency and market leadership, is reserved exclusively for brands that have earned the confidence of both consumers and industry leaders.

Commenting on the recognition, Managing Director Kishore Surtani said, “Achieving Superbrand status for the second time is a testament to the trust that generations of Sri Lankan families have placed in Flora Tissues. This honour reflects our pursuit of excellence, from maintaining the highest quality standards to pioneering hygiene solutions that meet the evolving needs of Sri Lankan consumers. We stand proud as a market leader who has become part of the daily lives of millions every day, in every home.’’

Since its inception in 1983, Flora Tissues has transformed Sri Lanka’s personal hygiene landscape as the country’s first soft disposable tissue manufacturer. What began as a humble operation in a rented factory in Ratmalana equipped with merely one machine and seven employees, has today grown into a state-of-the-art premises, consisting of a 70,000 square foot production, warehouse and distribution facility in the U. D. A. Katuwana Industrial Zone in Homagama.

With a workforce of over 300 employees and an established dealership network of over 22 distributors, Flora Tissues continues to flourish with its robust islandwide product availability. The product portfolio today extends well beyond traditional tissue products. From cotton wipes to disposable gloves, the brand continues to expand its presence in the hygienic disposables and kitchen essentials category, with a portfolio of over 50 products.

Sinopec extends Clean Sri Lanka network with new look stations across Anuradhapura

First Capital Holdings records Rs. 3.23Bn Total Comprehensive Income for 9M FY2025/26

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.