Pan Asia Bank joins hands with AIA Insurance to bring world-class protection, health and investment coverage to its valued customers

Reaffirming its customer-centric focus, the Truly Sri Lankan Bank, Pan Asia Bank, has forged a strategic partnership with AIA Insurance Lanka, to provide comprehensive insurance solutions – including protection, health and investment solutions – that meet the changing needs of the Bank’s valued consumers.

Expressing his enthusiasm about the new partnership, Naleen Edirisinghe, CEO of Pan Asia Bank said, “We are pleased to partner with AIA Insurance to offer unparalleled customer convenience and a diverse array of insurance solutions – spanning retirement plans, investment plans, life and health insurance. This strategic collaboration will offer our valued customers a much wider choice to ensure their financial security for a lifetime that best suits their needs without being constrained in their choices. Pan Asia Bank is committed to empower its customers with industry-best financial solutions.”

AIA Insurance Lanka, member of AIA Group, a global insurance provider is a key player in Sri Lanka’s insurance industry and has served millions of Sri Lankan’s for more than 3 decades. They are deeply committed to contributing towards the betterment of the Sri Lankan economy and society at large. While providing protection to customers at every stage of their lives, they offer a range of retirement, health and savings solutions for individuals, large corporate companies, and small & medium enterprises.

Adding further, the CEO of AIA Insurance, Chathuri Munaweera said, “As pioneers in Bancassurance in Sri Lanka we are constantly expanding our Partnership Distribution to be able to provide better financial protection to Sri Lankan’s. We are happy to partner with Pan Asia Bank and together we can provide customers with a wealth of experience and trust. I am confident that Pan Asia Bank customers will find AIA’s extensive propositions highly appealing and suited to their needs. This strategic partnership will undoubtedly enhance financial security for the Bank’s valued customer base”.

Pan Asia Bank is continuously committed to strengthening the value propositions offer to customers and enhancing service delivery. These new extensions will enable its customers can enjoy the convenience of attending to their banking and insurance needs under one roof at any of its 85 branches island-wide. The Bank’s spirit of innovation and customer-centric model ensures its customers are offered industry-best financial solutions. Recording consistent growth year after year, Pan Asia Bank is strongly positioned as the ‘Truly Sri Lankan Bank’, marking an illustrious journey that has promoted financial security and fulfilled the aspirations of its customers while supporting the prosperity of the nation.

Related Topics:AIA InsurancePan Asia BankPan Asia Bank joins hands with AIA Insurance

AIA Insurance advances expansion with new Regional Development Office in Matara

Pan Asia ‘Ezy Banking’ spaces in branches to enhance customer digital experience

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.