CA Sri Lanka’s 45th National Conference of Chartered Accountants to revolve around “Marching Beyond Margins”

With the outlook for Sri Lanka looking more hopeful than it had in the past few recent years, the Institute of Chartered Accountants of Sri Lanka (CA Sri Lanka) will once again engage professionals, including young business leaders, at the 45th National Conference of Chartered Accountants to play a critical role in helping the country seize new opportunities in its march towards a robust economy.

In the wake of the worst ever economic crisis faced by the country and while it still deals with its repercussions, which includes a significant brain drain to this date, it is clear that fresh perspectives are essential to ensure the survival of the nation, as well as its rise above the challenges hurled its way. As a professional institute of the highest calibre, CA Sri Lanka has continuously inculcated thought leadership among the professional community. This year’s National Conference hopes to inspire young leaders to fearlessly embrace the fast-evolving future and encourage them to go above and beyond the customary realm, when in pursuit of excellence.

The theme of this year’s conference, ”Marching Beyond Margins”, was unveiled at a special press conference organised by CA Sri Lanka, which was graced by CA Sri Lanka President Heshana Kuruppu, CA Sri Lanka Vice President Tishan Subasinghe, National Conference Committee Chairperson Chamara Abeyrathne, Technical Committee Chairman Wasaba Jayasekera, National Conference Committee Alternate Chair Ashane Jayasekara, Technical Committee Alternate Chairperson Nishani Perera and CA Sri Lanka Chief Operating Officer Lakmali Priyangika.

Addressing the press conference, Kuruppu said that this year’s conference will focus on the importance of being relentlessly future ready.

“Today’s world evolves at a pace that is both shocking as much as its exciting. Exciting because the challenges presented to us today can be used as opportunities to propel ourselves further. For the past 45 years, the National Conference of Chartered Accountants has been the harbinger of change, serving as a guiding light to the movers and the shakers of the nation,” he added. Kuruppu further noted that the conference will help everyone restrategise and realign their priorities and recognise the absolute necessity of looking beyond the traditional methods of accomplishing goals.  Elaborating on the importance of the National Conference, Abeyrathne said that the conference chose the “Marching Beyond Margins” as it best capsulates the need of the hour.

“Our theme this year signifies an embracing of global dynamics, technological advancements, and generational diversity in pursuit of excellence. With sessions under the topics of “Knowing the World”, “Knowing the Way”, “Knowing the Generation” and “Governance in a New World”, this National Conference promises to one that will enlighten and inspire you,” he stated.   The 45th National Conference of Chartered Accountants will be held from 14, 15 and 16 October 2024, at the Monarch Imperial, Sri Jayewardenepura, Kotte, and the event is expected to attract over 2,000 delegates, including business leaders and c-suite executives.