UNP requests earliest possible date for Sri Lanka presidential election

ECONOMYNEXT — The United National Party (UNP) has requested Sri Lanka’s Election Commission to hold the 2024 presidential as early as possible, a party official, adding that President Ranil Wickremesinghe will contest as an independent candidate.

UNP General Secretary and former MP Palitha Range Bandara told reporters outside the Election Commission premises Wednesday July 17 afternoon that the UNP anticipates a landslide victory for President Wickremesinghe.

“We asked the election commission to have the election in the shortest time possible,” he said.

Asked about the main opposition the Samagi Jana Balawegaya (SJB) and leftist National People’s Power (NPP), he said: “The SJB and the NPP badly want to accept defeat, so it’ll be good to have an early election to give them what they want.”

“President Ranil Wickremesinghe will contest as an independent candidate. Everyone can join. You can too,” he added.

Asked again about the challenge posed by the SJB and the NPP, the former MP said: “Not remotely. Don’t make jokes. The president will get a record number of votes.”

UNP parliamentarian Vajira Abeywardena who was also present with the UNP representatives who had just met election officials said Wickremesinghe cannot announce the election or his candidacy as president.

“As the president, he can’t make that announcement. But we will definitely put him forward. He will definitely come,” he said.

“As soon as the election commission announces dates, we will announce our candidate. We have so far said that Ranil Wickremesinghe is the candidate,” said Bandara.

NPP leader Anura Kumara Dissanayake said on Tuesday that he believes Sri Lanka’s presidential election will likely be held on September 28.

Meanwhile, Chairman of the National Election Commission R M A L Ratnayake told the media on Tuesday that the commission will publish the notice announcing nomination and election dates before the end of July. (Colombo/Jul17/2024)