Industry bodies flag gaps in Draft National Electricity Policy

The Ceylon Chamber of Commerce, together with the American Chamber of Commerce, Exporters Association of Sri Lanka, Federation of Renewable Energy Developers, Joint Apparel Association Forum, National Chamber of Commerce of Sri Lanka and Sri Lanka Association for Software and Services Companies, has submitted joint observations on the Draft National Electricity Policy, highlighting that several key issues have not been adequately addressed.

Whilst recognizing the need for reform in the electricity sector, the submission flags several gaps in the draft policy that require closer attention. Key areas such as affordability, decarbonisation commitments, incentives for renewable energy, competition, and the long-term financial health of the sector are either missing or not addressed in sufficient depth.

The proposed tariff revisions outlined in the draft energy policy raise concerns, particularly regarding the removal of cross-subsidies and the proposal to restrict subsidies exclusively to households consuming less than 30 kWh per month. Without detailed analysis, these measures could weaken access to sustainable and affordable energy and potentially lead to fiscal risks.

The provisions allowing uncompensated curtailment, removing feed-in tariffs, and imposing mandatory time-of-use tariffs on rooftop solar users could make renewable energy projects un-bankable for international lenders, thereby increasing the cost of capital for Sri Lanka.

Calling for a more future-focused approach, the submission stresses the need for a policy that reflects modern electricity systems, including planning for the energy transition, energy storage, market competition, cross-border electricity trading, and emerging technologies.

The Chambers and Associations request a comprehensive revision of the Draft National Electricity Policy, alignment with the Electricity Act, and resubmission following substantive consultation, and reiterate support to engage constructively with policymakers to shape a policy that supports affordability, investment confidence, and Sri Lanka’s long-term energy security.

JAT Holdings celebrates the 6th Pintharu Abhiman Convocation, uplifting over 800 painters through NVQ certification

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.