Japanese Ambassador visits Tokyo Cement factory in Trincomalee

Japanese Ambassador Akio Isomata and delegation at Tokyo Cement Jetty

Japanese Ambassador Akio Isomata at the Tokyo Cement product testing laboratory

Ambassador of Japan to Sri Lanka Akio Isomata, recently paid an official visit to the Tokyo Cement factory in Trincomalee, underscoring the long-standing friendship and economic cooperation between Japan and Sri Lanka.

The Ambassador was accompanied by Finance Attaché Yukako Mizunuma, and Second Secretary of the Embassy of Japan Sachi Tanaka. The visit highlighted Tokyo Cement’s latest expansion project, which recently added one million metric tons to the company’s manufacturing capacity, a milestone in strengthening Sri Lanka’s economic expansion and industrial development.

Welcomed at the Tokyo Cement Center for Excellence by Tokyo Cement Company (Lanka) PLC Managing Director S. R. Gnanam, and Non-Executive Director Michio Matsuoka, representing Mitsubishi UBE Cement Corporation, Tokyo Cement’s technology partner, the Japanese delegation toured the Eastern Cement Factory. The program included visits to the newly inaugurated cement mill, the Tokyo Cement Jetty at the Port of Trincomalee, and the A.Y.S. Gnanam Village Heartbeat Empowerment Centre, reflecting the company’s commitment to socio-economic development.

For more than four decades, Tokyo Cement has stood as a symbol of the enduring partnership between Japan and Sri Lanka, representing not only industrial growth but also a shared vision for sustainable development.

Ambassador Isomata, having observed the facilities of the factory, remarked that he was particularly impressed by the cement company’s achievement of not only strong performance but also 100% biomass-powered electricity generation, as well as highly impactful CSR activities focused on education and capacity-building of people of local communities, including women and children.

Being the country’s largest manufacturer of high-quality cement, concrete, and cement-based innovative products, Tokyo Cement has earned its reputation as the most trusted supplier in the construction industry. The company is dedicated to enriching the national economy through local value creation, while strengthening Sri Lanka’s industrial progress. With an unwavering commitment to quality, innovation, and sustainability, the company has become an integral part of the country’s growth journey to become the leading partner in nation-building.