Abans Marks Showroom Excellence with Lenovo Premium Club 2nd Phase Launch

In picture (below, from left to right): Mr. Manjula Silva (Senior General Manager - Retail - Abans), Mr. Tilan Thennakoon (Category Head Mobile & IT - Abans), Mr. Thangavelu Mathan (Abans Showroom Manager - Nuwaraeliya),Mr. Sivarama Krishnan  (Abans Showroom Manager - Kollupitiya), Mr. Nishantha Gonapinuwala  (Abans Showroom Manager - Ampara), Dr. Chathura Jayawardana (Chief Marketing Officer - Abans),Mr. Siraj Jabir (Country Business Head - Lenovo)

Abans, The Nation’s Laptop Provider, brought together excellence and ambition alongside global technology leader Lenovo at the Abans Lenovo Premium Club event held at Hilton Colombo Residences on 22nd January 2026. The evening honoured exceptional showroom managers for their remarkable performance and marked the official launch of the highly anticipated second phase of the Premium Club initiative.

The exclusive event recognised top-performing Abans showroom managers who went above and beyond in promoting Lenovo’s innovative products, consistently delivering customer-focused technology solutions while strengthening Lenovo’s presence as a leading global IT brand in Sri Lanka. Premium gifts were presented to high achieving showrooms, while the top three Lenovo performing showrooms were honoured with special trophies for setting new benchmarks in IT retail excellence among Abans’ expansive network of over 350 showrooms island wide, while taking the lead in ushering Sri Lanka to it’s digital future.

Speaking at the event, Dr. Chathura Jayawardana, Chief Marketing Officer of Abans, commended the dedication and passion of the showroom managers and their teams. “Our showroom managers and their teams play a pivotal role not only in driving IT sales but also in building trust, nurturing long-term customer relationships, and strengthening IT brands, especially Lenovo across Sri Lanka. These awards of recognition stand as evidence of your commitment for the pursuit of excellence. With the launch of the second phase of the Lenovo Premium Club, we aim to further motivate our teams to raise the bar, embrace innovation, and deliver even more value to our customers while leading Sri Lanka’s digital transformation,”.

The event was graced by distinguished members of Lenovo’s regional leadership, including Mr. Naveen Kejriwal (Director of Overseas Business - Lenovo India), Mr. Shekhar Karmakar (Regional Sales Head – Overseas Business, Lenovo India) and Mr. Siraj Jabir (Country Business Head – Lenovo Sri Lanka & Maldives), whose presence underscored the strong strategic partnership between Abans and Lenovo.

Also in attendance were senior representatives from Abans, including Mr. Tilan Tennakoon, Mr. Manjula Silva, Mr. Ruchira Mendis, Mr. Prasanna Hettiarachchi, and Mr. Shamala Dissanayake, further highlighting the importance Abans places on recognising and rewarding excellence in performance across categories.

As Sri Lanka’s No. 1 laptop services provider, Abans continues to lead the market by offering a comprehensive portfolio of Lenovo laptops, tablets, desktops, and accessories, backed by expert in-store consultation, island-wide availability, and trusted after-sales service. Through initiatives such as the Lenovo Premium Club, Abans strengthens its commitment to empowering its teams, driving innovation in IT retail, and delivering smarter technology solutions tailored to evolving customer needs.

Lenovo products are now available at Abans showrooms nationwide and online at BuyAbans.com.