Link Natural features exclusive B2B offerings at Hotel Show Colombo 2024

Link Natural, Sri Lanka’s leading manufacturer of herbal healthcare and personal care products, made its presence felt at the Hotel Show Colombo 2024, Sri Lanka’s largest hospitality trade exhibition, held for the 16th time at the BMICH recently. Along with its exclusive Hotel amenity, Spa and HORECA ranges, several of Link Natural’s brands – Samahan, Link Aushada, Earth Essence, Swastha Amurtha, Five Herbs, and Gotukola Tea – featured in the exhibition and drew significant interest from the thousands of visitors to the exhibition.

Over a decade, Link Natural has been a leading supplier for the Leisure industry in Sri Lanka by providing world-class hotel amenities, spa products, and HORECA (Hotel/Restaurant/Café) products to a majority of the renowned hotels and spa chains. Currently, Link Natural serves over 200 hotel and spa customers, including major chains such as Jetwing, Aitken Spence, Heritance, Taru Villas, Resplendent Ceylon, Barberyn Resort, and Amaya Resorts, among many others. The company works closely with its hotel clientele to carry out concept development projects for hotel amenities and spa products that best suit the different themes under each of the hotel brand names.

The company’s ayurveda pharmaceutical range plays a significant role in this business segment, and its ayurveda therapeutic oils are highly sought after by all the key players in the industry primarily due to the high product quality and the trust in the company.

Head of Marketing of Link Natural, Raj Kumar stated, “By participating in Hotel Show Colombo 2024 Link Natural has been able to demonstrate the deep connections we have with the Leisure Industry of Sri Lanka through our portfolio of products. Our large collection of herbal products is ideally-suited for any spa and hotel in Sri Lanka and widely used by the biggest brands in that domain. Our progress in this market over the years is a direct result of our commitment to quality, efficacy, and our capacity to customize our products to meet specific needs.”

LOLC Al-Falaah pays Rs.3.5 billion profits to depositors for financial year 2023/24

Teejay knits resilient start to 2024-25 with profit turnaround in Q1

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.