Celebration of 80th Independence Day of India in Sri Lanka

80th Independence Day of India was celebrated with great fervour in different parts of Sri Lanka on 15 August 2026.

The main event in Colombo was held at ‘India House’, the official residence of High Commissioner of India. High Commissioner of India to Sri Lanka Santosh Jha hoisted India’s National Flag and inspected the Guard of Honour. He also read excerpts of the address by India President Narendra Modi to the nation on the eve of the 80th Independence Day.

This year, High Commission of India participated in the Suryapath Tiranga initiative, a global relay where the Indian Flag was hoisted sequentially by Indian Missions, following the path of the sun across time zones.  The Indian Tricolor was hoisted in Sri Lanka, continuing the relay from Embassy of India, Kathmandu and was followed by the High Commission of India, Male continuing the symbolic relay from one sunrise to the next.

Several cultural events added vibrancy to the celebrations, with the Sri Lanka Navy Band delivering melodious tunes embodying valour and patriotism, while students of the Swami Vivekananda Cultural Centre (SVCC) performed famous patriotic songs.

High Commissioner and officers of High Commission of India also paid homage at the Indian Peace Keeping Force (IPKF) Memorial to the memory of the Indian soldiers of IPKF who made the supreme sacrifice defending peace and unity of Sri Lanka.

As part of this year’s Independence Day Celebrations, High Commission of India and SVCC conducted a Madhubani painting workshop, a Warli (tribal) art workshop, India-Sri Lanka Maitri Painting Competition for Children and a photography competition titled ‘India Through My Lens’, where unique compositions of India’s geography, culture, cuisine and people, as captured by Sri Lankan participants, were featured. To celebrate the 80th Independence Day, a special edition of Bharat ko Janiye (Know India) Quiz was conducted across the globe in which, Sri Lankans participated in record numbers, reflecting the strong people-to-people ties between the two countries. The top winners from Sri Lanka were felicitated during the Independence Day Celebrations on 15 Aug 2026, at India House.

Commemorating the 150th Anniversary of the India’s National Song, Vande Mataram, High Commission of India organised a number of activities over this Anniversary year, including mass singings of Vande Mataram by singers and musicians from across Colombo, as well as performance of the beloved song by famous Indian singers and musicians. This year, the global campaign Har Ghar Tiranga, which invites every Indian to hoist the National Flag and post a picture with the Tiranga, also saw enthusiastic participation in Sri Lanka. During Independence Day Celebrations on 15th August, High Commission of India organised an exhibition titled Har Ghar Tiranga, which showcased the history and significance of the National Flag and the role that the National Song played in the Freedom Struggle of India.

To commemorate the 80th Independence Day, special events and cultural performances were organised by the Assistant High Commission in Kandy, Consulate General in Jaffna and Consulate General in Hambantota as well on the momentous occasion.

Later in the day, a cultural evening titled “Swar Sangam” – A Fusion Symphony, featuring Veena Maestro Rajhesh Vaidhya, with a special performance by acclaimed Sri Lankan singer Yohani, was held to mark the 80th Independence Day of India. To further mark the celebrations, Havelock City Mall, in collaboration with SVCC and the High Commission of India, hosted ‘India Fest 2026’, a vibrant two-day festival from 15 to 16 August, that showcased Indian fashion, handicrafts, cuisine, live performances, film screenings, and cultural activities, offering the public an immersive experience of India’s rich heritage.