Israel asks citizens to leave Sri Lanka coastal towns, hide nationality

ECONOMYNEXT – Israel has asked citizens to avoid non-essential travel to Sri Lanka, leave coastal tourist areas including Arugam Bay and stop overt displays of Hebrew language in clothes or other signs that could lead to identification.

The warning came after the US embassy in Colombo warned citizens not to travel to Arugam Bay in the island’s Eastern Coast as there was credible information of an attack.

Acting police chief Priyantha Weerasooriya told reporters that in October 07, intelligence information was given to Sri Lanka and the matter was discussed by Sri Lanka’s National Security Council.

Related US warns citizens off Sri Lanka’s Arugam Bay citing possible attack

“The travel alert for Arugam Bay and the coastal areas in south and west Sri Lanka (including for the cities Ahangame, Galle, Hikkaduwa and Weligama) has been raised to level 4,” the Israel’s National Security Council said in a statement.

“We recommend leaving these areas immediately. For those currently in these areas, we recommend leaving the country or at least traveling to the capital city Colombo, where there is heavier presence of local security forces.”

“For the rest of Sri Lanka, the travel warning has been raised to level 3, and we recommend that Israelis planning to travel to Sri Lanka delay any non-necessary trips to the country.

“If you do travel to Sri Lanka, avoid the areas for which level-4 travel alerts have been issued.”

Israelis were asked to avoid displaying signs that could identify their nationality.

“When in public, avoid openly exhibiting anything that could identify you as Israeli, such as t-shirts with Hebrew writing, or any symbol that discloses your religion or nationality,” the statement said.

“Avoid gatherings of Israeli citizens in public places where there is no security.”

Among places where Israelis gathered in Arugam Bay was Chabad House, a location which offered services to Jewish travelers and Kosher food, according to industry sources.

Sri Lanka’s police said security has been tightened amid a conflict in the Middle East. Any tourist could call a the hotline 1997.

RELATED Sri Lanka boosting tourist security amid Middle East war, police hotline 1997

Israel said its security forces are “in close contact with the Sri Lankan security forces through the relevant organizations, and are monitoring the developments.”

The National Security Council is calling on Israeli citizens to immediately leave Arugam Bay and the south and west coastal areas of Sri Lanka

Today, Wednesday, October 23, 2024, the National Security Council (NSC) raised the travel alert level for Sri Lanka due to credible terrorism threats at the tourist and coastal areas:

1…..The travel alert for Arugam Bay and the coastal areas in south and west Sri Lanka (including for the cities Ahangame, Galle, Hikkaduwa and Weligama) has been raised to level 4.

We recommend leaving these areas immediately. For those currently in these areas, we recommend leaving the country or at least traveling to the capital city Colombo, where there is heavier presence of local security forces.

2. For the rest of Sri Lanka, the travel warning has been raised to level 3, and we recommend that Israelis planning to travel to Sri Lanka delay any non-necessary trips to the country. If you do travel to Sri Lanka, avoid the areas for which level-4 travel alerts have been issued.

In addition, the NSC stresses that Israelis in Sri Lanka must exercise increased precaution. Specifically:

• When in public, avoid openly exhibiting anything that could identify you as Israeli, such as t-shirts with Hebrew writing, or any symbol that discloses your religion or nationality.

• Avoid gatherings of Israeli citizens in public places where there is no security.

• Report any suspicion or unusual event to local security forces.

The Israel security forces are in close contact with the Sri Lankan security forces through the relevant organizations, and are monitoring the developments.