Top HR professional Priyantha Ranasinghe takes helm at CIPM Sri Lanka

CIPM Sri Lanka, the Nation’s Leader in Human Resource Management, today announced the appointment of Priyantha Ranasinghe as its new President, at the CIPM’s Annual General Meeting that brought together a large number of members. A seasoned HR professional with over 28 years of experience, Priyantha will steer CIPM into a new era of growth and innovation.

Priyantha brings a wealth of expertise to CIPM, having held senior HR roles in diverse sectors including hospitality, banking and finance, plantations, and food and beverage across Sri Lanka, Indonesia, India, and Malaysia. Currently, he is employed at Insee cement as Chief People Officer and prior to that he served as HR Director at Coca-Cola Beverages Sri Lanka Limited for 11 years.

“I am honored to take on the role of President at CIPM Sri Lanka,” said Priyantha, “My vision is to elevate CIPM into a world-class institution by Developing world-class People Leaders through structured study programmes, Creating a member-centric organization with innovative development initiatives, Fostering a growth mindset among CIPM staff through Design Thinking principles, and Strengthening CIPM’s national and international affiliations,”.

Since joining CIPM in 2009 as Honorary Editor, Priyantha has held various leadership roles including Honorary Secretary, Honorary Treasurer, Vice President, and chair of multiple standing committees.

CIPM, a constituent member of the Organization of Professional Associations (OPA) Sri Lanka, boasts a membership of over 1,500 HR professionals and approximately 6,000 students enrolled in its diverse HR programs. The institute is affiliated with the Asia Pacific Federation of Human Resources Management (APFHRM) and the World Federation of People Management Associations (WFPMA).

CIPM Sri Lanka is the country’s leading professional body for Human Resource Management. With a rich history spanning over six decades, CIPM has been at the forefront of shaping the HR landscape in Sri Lanka. Through its comprehensive range of programs, certifications, and events, CIPM empowers HR professionals to excel and contribute to organizational success

Hela and Authentic Brands Group announce outerwear partnership for Reebok

CSE turnover takes a nosedive following presidential poll date announcement

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.