River levels rise after heavy rain; residents in low-lying areas urged to remain alert

Colombo, Aug. 3 (Daily Mirror) - The Department of Irrigation said water levels in the upper reaches of the Mahaweli, Kelani and Kalu rivers have risen rapidly following heavy rainfall in the island's wet zone over the past 24 hours.

Speaking to the media, Director of Hydrology and Disaster Management Engineering L.S. Sooriyabandara urged people living in low-lying areas along these river basins to remain on high alert.

He said rainfall in the upper Mahaweli catchment, including Nawalapitiya, Nanu Oya and Watawala, had reached nearly 200 mm, with some areas recording more than 200 mm.

As a result, flood warnings have been issued for people living along the Mahaweli River between Nawalapitiya and Peradeniya.

However, Sooriyabandara said that although water levels had increased, there had been no sudden or dangerous rise so far.

He also said the current situation is not expected to reach the level of the previous Dikwella disaster, adding that the sudden rise in water levels was mainly due to overnight rainfall exceeding 70 mm in some areas.

Meanwhile, the upper Kelani River basin, including Laxapana, Norwood and nearby areas, recorded between 100 mm and 150 mm of rainfall, causing water levels to rise, particularly around Kitulgala.

Although water levels are now gradually receding, the department warned that there is still a risk of flooding in low-lying areas between Hanwella and Avissawella, as well as between Avissawella, Kitulgala and Norwood. Water levels in the lower reaches of the Kelani River may also increase.

The upper Ratnapura area received nearly 100 mm of rainfall, pushing the Kalu River water level at Ratnapura to the danger level.

Sooriyabandara noted that a major flood is not expected at present, but some low-lying areas could experience minor inundation.

He added that other rivers in the wet zone, including the Nilwala and Gin rivers, received between 50 mm and 75 mm of rainfall. However, these rivers are not expected to reach flood levels.

The department also confirmed that there is currently no flood risk in the Maha Oya and Attanagalu Oya basins, as those areas have received only limited rainfall.