Hidden costs of war

US President Donald Trump, driven by his MAGA dream, may have expected the bombing of Iran to scare the rival world powers, but the explosions in the Gulf have apparently shaken Washington instead. The Pentagon has asked for more than USD 200 billion from the White House for its war on Iran. Trump is now left with no alternative but to keep on pouring tax money into an endless war, much to the consternation of the public at home, with the midterm elections due in November 2026. What the Pentagon has asked for amounts to approximately 10 percent of funds the US government annually spends on healthcare, according to some media reports.

The US is reported to have already spent about USD 18 billion on the Iran war. This shows how costly the conflict will be for the US citizens economically. The predicament of Iran is far worse; it has had to bear huge human and social costs of the war besides the staggering economic losses. Israel has also suffered considerable damage despite its leaders’ claims to the contrary. It is reported to have allocated about USD 10 billion for the war so far.

The Pentagon’s request for more funds is expected to trigger a bipartisan battle on Capitol Hill when it is presented to the Congress. Some analysts have said Trump will have his work cut out to secure the allocation of funds as many Congress members are against his war.

Meanwhile, a hidden cost of the Iran war has come to light. The World Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO) has issued a dire warning. The FAO report on the Gulf conflict, released yesterday, has pointed out that the ongoing war is likely to lead to a major global food scarcity due to a crippling fertiliser shortage caused by the Iran war, especially the closure of the Hormuz Strait. The Persian Gulf is usually known for its energy exports, but it is also a major hub for global fertiliser production and exports.

Iran, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, and Oman are among the world’s leading exporters of nitrogen fertilisers, including urea and ammonia, accounting for roughly 30–35 percent of global urea exports and around 20–30 percent of ammonia exports, according to FAO. Overall, up to 30 percent of global fertiliser exports is channelled through the Strait of Hormuz, the closure of which has severely affected international fertiliser supply chains. Production cuts and shipping constraints have stalled an estimated 3–4 million tonnes of fertiliser trade per month, and global fertiliser prices could average 15–20 percent higher during the first half of 2026 if the crisis continues, FAO says. This is a frightening proposition.

Developing countries will be the worst affected by the Gulf conflict as their governments have no way of absorbing the fertiliser price shocks, which will lead to higher production costs and an increase in food inflation. The paddy harvesting season is currently on in this country, and farmers are complaining that they have no fuel for crop-gathering machines. Fuel is likely to be the least of their problems. They will need fertiliser when the next cultivation season commences. The cultivators of other crops also need fertiliser to help maintain the domestic food supply and exports. One can only hope that the government will formulate a strategy to face such an eventuality.

FAO has also warned that “lower fertiliser applications can reduce crop yields and increase food security risks directly and indirectly in vulnerable regions through local supply changes and future reduction of outputs in global breadbaskets, with higher fuel prices also increasing transport and logistics costs, raising the cost of food imports and further pressuring domestic food prices”.

Trump’s allies in the Gulf region will also face structural food security vulnerabilities, according to FAO. They are reportedly dependent on imports for between 70 and 90 percent of their food supply. Their food reserves will run out if the conflict drags on for a long time. Thus, they will face attacks by Iran on their oil fields and critical infrastructure, a drop in their revenue, and a possible food scarcity. Washington will have to factor in this situation when it decides whether to continue attacks on Iran.

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.