Nepal urges villagers to evacuate after flood triggered by landslide

Business Standard - Nepali authorities urged villagers ​on Sunday to move to safer places after a flood in a river in the central part of the country swept away several houses and infrastructure, but there were no reports of any casualties.

A dry landslide in Chumnubri village in Gorkha district, about 100 ‌km (62 miles) west of Kathmandu, blocked ​the Budhi Gandaki River, leading to ​downstream flooding, authorities said.

The Budhi Gandaki is a tributary of the ​Trishuli River, downstream from another tributary where a glacier collapse caused a catastrophic flood in August that killed 1,457 people, with thousands still missing.

"We have asked villagers living along the river banks downstream to evacuate and remain safe," said ​Dharmendra Kumar Mishra, the Gorkha district's most senior bureaucrat.

Mishra said about a dozen ‌houses and two suspension bridges had been swept away, and a hydroelectric ​project camp was damaged by the flood.

The flooded river carrying muddy sludge is rising and has washed away a highway bridge connecting Gorkha with the neighbouring Dhading district, said Dharam ‌Raj Uprety, chief of the National ​Disaster Risk Reduction and Management ‌Authority.

The army rescued six people from Jagat who were facing the risk of ‌a landslide, Prime Minister Balendra Shah said in a social media post. ​Another 18 workers at the hydroelectric project that had its camp was damaged escaped to safety, Uprety said.

National disaster authorities alerted ​people living along the river in the Gorkha, Tanahun, Chitwan, East Nawalparasi and West Nawalparasi districts about the flood.

"Please help ensure that ‌people in at-risk areas are moved to safe locations in time and assist ‌search and rescue operations as needed," the National Disaster Risk Reduction and Management Authority said in a social media post.

Officials said army and police rescue personnel had reached the area and were also monitoring the situation from a helicopter.