Government sees 5mn  tourists as maximum

Sri Lanka should regard five million tourists a year as the maximum the island can accommodate and focus future growth on generating greater value from visitors, Deputy Tourism Minister Prof. Ruwan Ranasinghe said, signalling a shift away from a volume-driven tourism strategy.

“For an island of this size and type, I think five million tourists would be the maximum,” Ranasinghe said, citing Sri Lanka’s small size, sensitive ecosystems and fragile cultural heritage.

“We are no longer interested only in volumes. We are a small island nation with sensitive ecological settings, a small population, and fragile cultural practices and heritage. We need to be cautious about this.”

Ranasinghe said the government considered the immediate challenge of rebuilding tourist arrivals to have been largely addressed and would now turn its attention to increasing the value generated by the industry.

“When we took over 22 months ago, the challenge concerned tourist volumes. By now, I think we have addressed that,” he said.

“We have dealt with the issue of volume for now, and we have taken the necessary steps. All our officials, promoters and everyone involved, including those in aviation, have worked to bring in the volume.

“Now, however, we need to focus on value. That is the way forward.”

Ranasinghe warned that pursuing visitor numbers without considering the island’s carrying capacity could create overtourism, pointing to growing resistance to visitors in some established international destinations.

“Our colleague from Spain will tell you how people openly resist overtourism in cities such as Barcelona. We do not need that in this country,” he said.

The Deputy Minister was speaking at the launch of two consultancy initiatives covering Sri Lanka’s National Tourism Strategy Plan and Global Promotion Campaign Roadmap, which are expected to guide the industry’s future development and international positioning.

Ranasinghe said Sri Lanka should be purposefully transformed into a high-value tourism destination, leveraging its natural and cultural assets rather than relying primarily on increasing visitor numbers.

The country had the ocean, marine wildlife, tea-growing regions, rainforests, cultural heritage and hospitality needed to compete with leading global destinations, he said, while acknowledging that the industry had yet to realise its full potential despite more than half a century of formal development.

“To be frank, however, we have not realised the full potential of this industry,” Ranasinghe said.

He said the next phase of tourism growth should also ensure that economic benefits are distributed more widely rather than concentrated among a small number of businesses.

“We do not need a tourism industry that remains in the hands of a few companies or a few people. We need to incorporate these industries and, in particular, extend the benefits to the ordinary people of this country and to the wider economy,” he said.

Ranasinghe also called for the new tourism strategy and promotional roadmap to result in implementation, saying Sri Lanka had already produced numerous studies and consultancy reports on the industry.