Anverally and Sons earns prestigious ISO/IEC 17025 international certification for in-house laboratory

Anverally and Sons General Manager Process Control Lasantha De Silva and Sri Lanka Accreditation Board (SLAB) Chairman Air Vice Marshal (Retd.) Prasanna Ranasinghe (third and fourth from right) at the presentation of the ISO 17025 certification. Also in the picture are (from left): Anverally and Sons Senior Executive – Quality Assurance Nuwanthika Rathnayake and Junior Analyst Supuni Rathugamage, SLAB Deputy Director – Accreditation Mithila Gunesekara, and Anverally and Sons Chemist cum R&D Executive Anjali Randeniya and Quality Assurance Assistant Ishara Chathurangi

Anverally and Sons Ltd., one of Sri Lanka’s foremost exporters of Ceylon Tea, has strengthened its reputation for uncompromising quality and global trust by securing ISO/IEC 17025 accreditation for its state-of-the-art in-house laboratory.

This internationally recognised certification, which is valid until March 2029, confirms that Anverally’s laboratory operates competently and produces valid, reliable test results in accordance with rigorous global standards.

The audit process was conducted by the Sri Lanka Accreditation Board (SLAB) and is further endorsed by the International Accreditation Forum (IAF) and the International Laboratory Accreditation Cooperation (ILAC), ensuring broad acceptance of the laboratory’s results in international markets.

The scope of the accreditation covers chemical testing of black and green tea as well as biological testing for teas, beverages, potable water and reverse osmosis water. These capabilities enable the laboratory to comprehensively verify the safety and quality of food and agricultural products. While the laboratory currently conducts testing exclusively for in-house requirements, plans are already underway to extend services to third-party clients in the future, the company said.

“For Anverally and Sons, this achievement marks a significant milestone in its ongoing journey to maintain the highest quality benchmarks,” the company’s Chairman Mohamed Anverally said, “This certification builds international trust by assuring buyers that every batch of tea undergoes rigorous testing in a laboratory whose results are accepted worldwide. It also helps the company meet diverse export compliance requirements without relying on external facilities, streamlining the export process and improving efficiency.”

For customers, the ISO/IEC 17025 accreditation provides confidence that Anverally’s laboratory consistently delivers precise and reliable results. This assurance reinforces the safety and consistent quality of the company’s tea products and underscores its commitment to continuous improvement and excellence.

“This new accreditation therefore further consolidates Anverally and Sons’ reputation as a trusted exporter delivering products that meet stringent global standards, while reinforcing its long-standing commitment to quality, safety and customer satisfaction,” Anverally added.

He said ISO/IEC 17025 certification also helps facilitate cooperation between laboratories and other bodies by generating wider acceptance of results between countries. Test reports and certificates can be accepted from one country to another without the need for further testing, which, in turn, facilitates international trade.