MTV Channel to host 2026  Asia-Pacific Broadcasting Union’s General Assembly in Sri Lanka

ABU Secretary General Ahmed Nadeem (right) presents the ratification for the hosting of the 2026 General Assembly to CMG Group CEO Suresh Srinivasan (centre) and CMG Group Director – Legal and HR Suranga Jayalath, at the ABU’s 118th Administration Council meeting held on 20 October in Istanbul, Turkiye

The Asia-Pacific Broadcasting Union (ABU) has selected Sri Lanka’s MTV Channel Ltd. to host the 2026 ABU General Assembly in Sri Lanka.

Capital Maharaja Group (CMG) Group CEO Suresh Srinivasan and CMG Group Director – Legal and HR Suranga Jayalath received the ratification at the ABU’s 118th Administration Council meeting held on 20 October in Istanbul, Turkiye.

The ABU is the largest broadcasting union in the world, with its 250 members in 70 countries across five continents, reaching three billion people across the Asia-Pacific region. Established in 1964, it is a not-for-profit, non-government, non-political professional association of broadcasters and broadcast media players.

Capital Maharaja Group Director and Head of the Group’s Media Vertical Chevaan Daniel said, “MTV Sri Lanka is incredibly proud to be the host of this massive international event. It will no doubt, establish Sri Lanka as an important crossroad of international relations and global media. We look forward to welcoming the world to Sri Lanka, in 2026.”

Sri Lanka’s largest and most independent media network, MTV Channel and its sister company MBC Networks Ltd provide the latest news, entertainment, sports and edutainment across a dozen TV and radio channels in three languages, and on all major social media platforms.

Earlier this year, CMG hosted the ‘International Bali Process Business and Government Forum – Sri Lanka Summit’, a gathering of global leaders in the fight against human trafficking and modern-day slavery, that led to the landmark ‘Colombo Declaration’. It was attended by ministerial delegates from the Asia-Pacific, diplomats, delegates from international organisations, and key business leaders.

The Company has a state-of-the-art convention centre – Stein Studios – in Ratmalana, just south of Colombo, which is the largest in South Asia.