Vignettes, USA

Americans like to think of themselves as a young country, and a young people. They like to think they represent the New World. In Daisy Miller, the great Henry James contrasts the insouciance of this new world with staidness of the old. The new world does not, to be sure, always triumph – the heroine in Daisy Miller, for instance, meets a tragic ending – yet even in tragedy, one feels that it has been vindicated over the old.

America is Daisy Miller: everyone wants to court her, but after a while, everyone wants to be done with her. This is the first myth of the world’s (supposedly) youngest democracy: that it brims with innocence. We all want to see it, but after some point, grow tired of it. Charles Dickens, who visited the country in 1842, grew disillusioned with the people. “He began,” notes one of his biographers, “to find them overbearing, boastful, vulgar, uncivil, insensitive, and above all acquisitive.” When Dickens returned to England, he wrote Martin Chuzzlewit, which presented a highly unflattering view of Americans.

This leads one to the second of America’s founding myths: that it is a land of opportunity. When you switch on the television, you almost always get bombarded by advertisements targeting the most seemingly inconsequential wants, wishes, desires, and dreams, from window fittings to dark circles. This is because Americans are quick to spot out what people want, and they are quick to find a solution, patchwork or otherwise. They are the ultimate salesmen. What Dickens found distasteful about this – the “uncivil, insensitive, and above all acquisitive” character of its people – is what has kept the country going for the last 250 years. Yet in this gold rush for opportunity, some make it, others get left behind. Equality of opportunity, after all, does not always ensure equality of outcome.

That underlies the third founding myth of America: of it being a nation of immigrants. The country was itself founded on immigration, or more correctly, settler-immigration: what Susan Sontag called “the unquestioned assumption of the right of White people” to come and take over the land of those who lived before them. The anthropologist Eric Wolf, in his masterly study Europe and the People without History, explains how the settlers saw indigenous people and how the latter responded to them. Some were ready to mingle with the white people, even live alongside them. Others were not.

I am not the first person to say that what happened to these people was genocide, and I won’t be the last. Many Americans accept it as such as well: some even admit that white settlers provided a template for Hitler’s final solution. This candidness is a virtue: it is what makes it possible for commentators like Ta-Nehisi Coates to court the liberal mainstream (“My President Was Black”, a tribute to Obama) and to write a book (The Message, partly about Palestine) that reflects critically on it. What with the war in the Middle East and Gaza in particular, such candidness is (thankfully) becoming more prevalent.

In America, the media, the so-called “lamestream-mainstream” as well as the conservative fringe, plays a major role in shaping public consciousness. Right-wing commentators tend to distance themselves from liberal outfits, but the reality is that the two share a lot with each other. Both have certain specific ideological affinities, and both – sometimes inadvertently, sometimes not – see the world through the lens of those affinities. Thus, the right-wing media brands Kamala Harris as a dangerous radical, an appeaser of countries hostile to America, while the liberal media questions Donald Trump’s patriotic credentials. Liberal or conservative, the media perpetuates stereotypes about the country’s representatives: thus, Harris is a left-wing Marxist, while Trump is an out-and-out fascist.

Everyone wants to migrate to America, and everyone wants to live there. Few among them make it, but many of those who do see themselves as part of a new body politic. “American” thus becomes more than an adjective: it becomes an abstract noun, which distinguishes you from every other term in the English language. “I’m not a Communist,” Humphrey Bogart declared at the height of the anti-communist witch-hunts of the 1950s. “I’m an American.” From this follows a wide array of interesting terms: we not only have “American food”, a mishmash of different cuisines, and “American English”, a travesty, but “American interests”, “American values”, and most cryptic of all, “the American way.”

But perhaps I am making a mistake here. Perhaps I am wrong in identifying the United States with America. America is a continent, not a country: it is Canada, Mexico, Chile, Argentina, Brazil, and many others. The United States is not America, just as India is not South Asia. Yet for better or worse, the US has come to define the American continent, just as India has come to dominate the Indian Ocean. This has given it a sense of security that encourages it to think of itself as immune from what happens to the rest of the world. When it sneezes, predictably, the rest of the continent catches a cold. Pierre Trudeau put it best: “Living next to you,” he once said, “is in some ways like sleeping with an elephant.”

US politicians, on the left and right, refer to the “average American.” This may be the biggest myth of them all. “There is no average American,” a friend of mine told me in Seattle. “It is a lie.” When I hemmed and hawed – clearly, I should have known better than to assume I knew about Americans more than Americans – and started talking about average  middle-class Americans, he cut me. “There is no average middle-class here,” he said. “There is no average anything, period.” I then pointed out that both this year’s presidential candidates invoke the term. “Of course they do,” my friend smirked.

The most diplomatic and charitable thing one could say about the US is that it is a paradox. Back home we are fed images of what America is supposed to be: cowboys and Indians, blacks and whites, burgers and French fries. Yet once one has lived long enough here, one tends to question these stereotypes, and ask what America really is and what it represents. Of course, one may never find answers to these questions.

Perhaps these questions cannot be answered. Perhaps it’s futile to search for answers in the first place. America is an irony: a country built by settlers that thrives on immigration, a country where everyone can try everything, but very few make it till the end – a country that imposes rules on the rest of us – yet has the power to bend them on its own.

Uditha Devapriya is a regular commentator on history, art and culture, politics, and foreign policy who can be reached at . Together with Uthpala Wijesuriya, he heads U & U, an informal art and culture research collective.

Pathfinder Foundations launches Sinhala Translation of ‘The India Way: Strategies for an Uncertain World”

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.