Presidential election deposit paid for Sri Lanka’s Anura Dissanayake

ECONOMYNEXT — The leftist National People’s Power (NPP) has paid the cash deposit for the candidature of party leader Anura Kumara Dissanayake at Sri Lanka’s 2024 presidential election.

News footage showed that NPP parliamentarians Harini Amarasuriya and Vijitha Herath and attorney-at-law Sunil Watagala and others arrive at the premises of the Election Commission Tuesday August 06 morning to pay the deposit.

Seventeen contestants have paid their deposit for the upcoming election which is scheduled to be held on September 21.

As per the Presidential Elections Act No. 15 of 1981, a candidate nominated by a recognised political party has to deposit only 50,000 rupees while an independent candidate, or a candidate nominated by any other party or by an elector, must pay only 75,000 rupees.

These amounts have not been revised in 43 years, opposition MP Dullas Alahapperuma recently told parliament.

The MP said the cabinet of former president Gotabaya Rajapaksa had approved an amendment to the act to increase these amounts.

“The election commission proposed that this be increased to 2.5 million rupees for political parties and 3 million for independent candidates. This was a pertinent proposal. There were 35 candidates who contested the last election,” he said.

The Act notes that “Where the number of votes polled by any candidate does not exceed one-eighth of the total number of votes polled at the election, the deposit made in respect of such candidate shall be declared forfeit and shall be transferred by the Commissioner from the deposit account to the Consolidated Fund, and in every other case the deposit shall be returned to the person who made the deposit, as soon as may be after the result of the election is declared.”

At the 2019 presidential election, said Alahapperuma, the deposits made by all candidates besides the top two contenders were transferred to the Consolidated fund.

“The number of candidates might be 80 or 85 this election. Many candidates have no basis for contesting, and it costs a vast sum of money to print ballots and other expenses, not to mention the time consumed for counting votes. This is not just to prevent proxy parties from contesting but also to save a lot of national wealth,” he said. (Colombo/Aug06/2024)