How middle powers cooperate to achieve shared goals

‘Australia’s engagement with institutions, such as the Indian Ocean Rim Association (IORA) and “minilateral” platforms, including the Quad and the Combined Maritime Force, are practical examples of middle powers working together to address shared challenges ranging from ocean piracy to humanitarian assistance, Australia High Commissioner to Sri Lanka Matthew Duckworth said at a recent round table forum featuring the media and other important sections, held at the Colombo Club of the Taj Samudra Hotel on the topic ‘Middle Power Diplomacy.’

The forum was organized and conducted by the Pathfinder Foundation of Sri Lanka under the moderation of the latter’s Chairman, Ambassador (Rtd.) Dr. Bernard Goonathilake.

High Commissioner Duckworth underscored that such cooperation is not directed against any particular country but aims to preserve an open, inclusive, and rules-based regional order.

H.C. Duckworth acknowledged the reality of major power competition while stressing that Australia seeks stable and respectful relations with all countries, including Sri Lanka, cooperating where possible and disagreeing where necessary, without compromising core national interests.

Further, the H.C. focused on India’s evolving role in the Indian Ocean, the trajectory of China’s rise, the durability of the current global order, alliance dynamics, and Sri Lanka’s positioning in the Indian Ocean.

Responding to a question about India, the High Commissioner affirmed that Australia expects all major powers—India, China, and the United States—to act transparently and to respect the sovereignty of smaller states. On whether the current emphasis on middle-power diplomacy is a temporary shift or a long-term trend, the High Commissioner stated that middle powers must now play a more visible and proactive role in sustaining international norms and institutions.

H.C. Duckworth added that Australia invests in Sri Lanka in sectors, such as, minerals, renewable energy, textiles and education services. The High Commissioner reiterated Australia’s support for open trade and deeper regional economic integration, emphasizing the importance of economic resilience in a contested global environment.

The Pathfinder Foundation is a Colombo-based think tank dedicated to fostering informed dialogue on foreign policy, economic development and strategic affairs.

Green Minds: A new platform to rethink environmental governance in Sri Lanka

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.