Sheraton Colombo Hotel treats moms to an unforgettable experience on Mother’s Day

Sheraton Colombo Hotel, is creating a memorable experience this Mother’s Day, where each mom is celebrated and cherished with love and gratitude.

Extending an invitation to the leading lady in our lives, the hotel offers a day of pure indulgence and relaxation with its stylish surroundings as the ideal sanctuary to honour and celebrate her remarkable spirit. Whether she desires a unique afternoon tea experience, a spa retreat, or simply quality time with loved ones, Sheraton Colombo Hotel presents bonding time for mothers, children and families.

In celebration of Mother’s Day, on 12 May, Sheraton Colombo Hotel has curated a decadent unique afternoon Tea at the Colpetty Lounge. Signature scones served with Clotted Cream, Homemade Berry Preserve and Crème Anglasise, a delicately balanced cold and hot selection including Smoked Salmon, Classic Egg salad sandwiches and elegant tartlets offer a burst of flavour in every bite. The indulgent sweets promise to satisfy mum’s sweet tooth and leave her craving more. There will even be House made Pralines as Petit Four for guests.

Karan Talpade, Executive Chef at Sheraton Colombo, commenting on this unique experience says, “Mother’s Day is a special celebration honouring the love and sacrifices of mothers everywhere. At Sheraton Colombo Hotel, we have curated a truly indulgent experience, infusing each dish with the warmth and nurturing essence that mothers represent. From intricate flavours to artistic presentations, our Mother’s Day offerings are a heartfelt tribute to the incredible women who shape our lives with their care and devotion.”

With a rich culinary experience spanning over a decade and stints at renowned hotels across India and the Middle East, Chef Karan Talpade, will be serving an exquisite array of Mother’s Day delicacies at Sheraton Colombo Hotel.

In addition, a special Mother’s Day dinner buffet awaits diners at the Colombo Kitchen, the all-day dining restaurant at the hotel the bountiful spread, together with a line-up of food and drink experiences is designed for the special occasion and an unforgettable celebration for the whole family.

WIS inaugurates new wing of Colombo office to support expansion of Sri Lankan operations

President’s comments bring bourse back to life following dismal start

Sheraton Colombo Hotel celebrates International Women’s Day with empowering insights

Sheraton Colombo Hotel welcomes guests to a new era of hospitality

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.