Vehicles imported for Sri Lanka’s tourism sector will be year-old, taxed: official

ECONOMYNEXT — The buses and vans that Sri Lanka plans to import for the tourism sector will be a year old, as opposed to brand new vehicles that would cost more, and also subject to tax as usual, State Minister of Finance Ranjith Siyambalapitiya said.

Siyambalapitiya told reporters that the country’s rapidly recovering tourism industry needs to follow the same global standards which don’t allow for vehicles more than six years old.

“In 2020, vehicle imports were stopped due to the foreign exchange crisis in the country, since our biggest forex expenditure was for vehicle imports. But we allowed for some imports under special circumstances from time to time. For example, to meet the needs of the health ministry and other ministries. Now the tourism industry is faced with such an essential need,” he said.

“The vehicles we already have are aging, and they’re also not enough. So the cabinet decided to allow the import of 250 buses and 750 vans specifically for the tourism industry,” he said.

The state minister said the Import and Export Control Department will issue a circular, announcing the issuance of licenses for the planned imports.

“We will allow the import of year-old vehicles, because year-old vehicles are sold at a much lower price than brand new vehicles. This was a decision taken to save on foreign exchange.

“There is also no tax relief provided for these imports. They will be taxed as usual. The purpose here is only to bring in vehicles for tourism,” he said.

According to Cabinet Spokesman and Transport Minister Bandula Gunawarena, the imports will comprise 750 electric and hybrid vans with 6–15 seating capacity, 250 buses with 6–30 seating capacity and 30–45 seating capacity.

“As a result of import restrictions on vehicles and essential spare parts, the state of many vehicles used in the tourist industry are not of a satisfactory level,” Gunawardena said at the cabinet press briefing on Tuesday April 02.

“The use of outdated vehicles for tourist transportation is damaging Sri Lanka’s reputation as a premier tourist destination,” he said. (Colombo/Apr04/2024)