Sudden summons to meet visiting Pakistan PM & important appointments

On Feb.15, 1991, the President appointed me as a member of the Presidential Commission on Finance and Banking. The other members included Mr. Lal Jayasundera, Chairman of the Hayleys Group of Companies; Mr. K. Gunaratnam, Chairman Export Development Board; Professor W.D. Lakshman, Professor of Economics, University of Colombo; Dr. A.M. M. Sahabdeen, former Civil Servant and now Chairman or Director of a number of companies; Ambassador C. Gunasingham, Additional Secretary to the President; and Mr. Susil Sirivardana, a senior public servant with considerable experience of the rural sector.

The Chairman of the Commission was Dr. M.R.P. Salgado, former Additional Secretary, Ministry of Planning and thereafter, a senior officer of the International Monetary Fund (IMF.) The Secretary to the Commission was Dr. Ranee Jayamaha, a senior Officer of the Central Bank of Sri Lanka. This was the first such Commission covering this area of post- independent Sri Lanka and had given to it wide terms of reference to examine and report on the entire field of Finance and Banking. Starting work in February 1991, the Commission issued nine interim reports on the following subject areas:-

(1) “Historical Setting, Major Policy Issues and the Commission’s Tasks and work programme; ” (2) “Allocating Resources to Priority or Weaker Sections and Channeling Credit to the Poor; ” (3) “Debt Recovery Legislation; ” (4) “The National Savings Bank; ” (5) “Development Banks and other Institutional Sources of Medium and Long Term Funds; ” (6) “Finance Companies; ” (7) “Commercial Banks and other Deposit Taking Institutions; ” (8) “The Capital Market; ” and (9) “The Central Bank of Sri Lanka.

In addition to these nine interim reports issued between March 31, 1991 and November 28, 1992, the Commission also issued a confidential report on the two State Banks for the information of the President. This report was not published. The final report of the Commission was issued on December 31, 1992. Volume I of this report which ran over 200 pages gathered all the main issues, including various issues relating to the State Banks in the confidential report. Volume II consisted of a number of important documents, memoranda, statistical tables, etc.

I do not know for certain as to why I was appointed to this Commission. It may have been due to my considerable experience in commercial dealings as Deputy Food Commissioner and Secretary to the Ministry of Food and Co-operatives. It could also have been due to my knowledge of the co-operative sector and rural credit. I had been a member of the Rural Credit Advisory Committee of the Central Bank, as well as a member of the Rasaputram Committee appointed to report on poverty alleviation, a member thereafter of the Planning team of the Janasaviya Trust Fund and later a member of its Board of Trustees. Lastly, I had been a member of the Board of Directors of the People’s Bank and later the People’s Merchant Bank for a considerable period of time. For some reason work seems to gravitate towards me.

In the Banking Commission too, this happened. When the Chairman Dr. Salgado had to go to Washington on a few occasions, my fellow commissioners insisted that I should chair the Commission in his absence, and that is what happened.

An interesting episode occurred during this period. The SAARC summit was being held in Colombo in October 1991. On Saturday, October 9, I was sitting on the Banking Commission in the premises of the Central Bank Training Institute at Rajagiriya. We usually met regularly on Saturdays also. At about 10 a.m. I was informed that there was an urgent telephone call for me from the Pakistan delegation at the Taj Samudra Hotel in Colombo. I was rather puzzled. When I answered the call, it turned out to be a request.

The officer at the other end apologized for the very short notice and asked whether it would be possible for me to meet Prime Minister Nawaz Sharif at about I1 a.m. in the hotel. He wished to discuss some issues relating to education with me. I first thought this was some hoax. But a little into the conversation, I realized that it was authentic. I obtained their telephone number and said I would call back. It struck me that I could not go into discussions with foreign heads of state or government, without a mandate from an appropriate authority here.

By this time President Premadasa was also the Minister of Education. I will record later some of the events leading up to his assuming the Ministry. I now immediately rang up the President. Fortunately, he was available at Sucharita, his personal office. One thing about the President was that he was readily contactable on the phone. Day or night he could always be contacted on the telephone. I mentioned the request and received instructions to go immediately. I next rang home and asked a surprised wife to have one of my suits ready immediately.

I then took leave of my bemused colleagues in the Commission, sped home, dressed and was at the Taj by about 11.20 a.m. At 11.30 a.m. Prime Minister Nawaz Sharif came down accompanied by his Foreign Minister, some senior officials and the Ambassador. Some seats were found in a section of the lobby and the conversation began. The Prime Minister apologized for the short notice and thanked me warmly for coming. He then asked me a number of questions on the structure of Sri Lankan Education. We discussed the issue of free education, primary and secondary education and some aspects of University education.

The Prime Minister was surprised at the level of our investment in education, including free school text books. He thought that Pakistan couldn’t afford such wide spread programs of free education and other benefits. At the same time he was concerned about the low literacy rates in Pakistan. I pointed out that there was also too much gender inequality in Pakistan education and tried to tell him of the importance of educating girls and the impact this would have on many facets of society.

We were about half an hour into our discussion when the arrival of Prime Minister D.B. Wijetunge was announced. He had come to accompany the Pakistan Prime Minister to the airport, the Summit being over. Mr. Sharif expressed his regret that the conversation had to end. He said he didn’t want to keep our Prime Minister waiting. “We must meet again soon,” he said as I took my leave. Later, I put up a note on this conversation to the President, who instructed me to render whatever assistance that was possible in case Pakistan requested it.

Sometime during late April 1991, Mrs. Maya Abeywickrema who was in charge of the Western music unit of the Ministry informed me that a whole load of valuable musical instruments gifted by the Japanese government were lying in various store rooms in schools. She feared that long storage would cause irreparable damage to them. She had an idea of forming a National Youth Orchestra, but she needed considerable backing and support. She wondered what to do. I immediately said that I would back her.

I knew Maya possessed both organizational ability and great resources of energy. We were in a situation where millions of rupees worth of instruments were rotting in stores. Obviously there was no time to be lost. I gave Maya, the date, May 8, to organize a meeting under my Chairmanship to consider issues relating to the formation of an orchestra. I requested her to invite a group of experienced and knowledgeable people, including the music directors of the three armed services and the police. In the meantime, I was looking into ways and means of funding.

Minister Athulathmudali as usual was very supportive. The meeting turned out to be a good one. We were able to take concrete decisions to carry the project forward. Everyone was supportive and positive. Maya thought that we could obtain sponsors to cover the costs of training and performances. Tickets would also be sold. I gave this project strong personal backing. Without such backing, Maya who was virtually a one woman crusader could not have survived. After this first meeting, we had a couple of follow up meetings and Maya did the rest.

She periodically informed me of progress. From the beginning the policy was to create opportunities for talent available in districts out of Colombo as well, and not confine the talent quest and training to Colombo only. The organization and the work went on apace, and the inaugural concert of the National Youth Orchestra took place in the packed hall of Navarangahala-Royal College, Colombo on October 17, 1992, barely a year after the first series of meetings. It was a grand sight to see the school children in their black dresses and trousers and starched white shirts and black bows, looking so professional and so impressive.

The smallest performer was around 13 years of age. It was an enchanting evening, with the orchestra conducted by Mr. Lalanath de Silva, playing several classical pieces of music. Under Maya’s guidance and hard work the orchestra grew adding on a large choir in the process. The Japanese government gave assistance and local firms such as John Keells, Cold Stores and Union Bank helped with sponsorships. The orchestra continues to function and perform, and I am happy that I was able to play a pioneering role in setting it up and affording opportunities to so many children in all parts of the country.

On May 25, 1991, President Premadasa formally and ceremonially inaugurated the Janasaviya Trust Fund at the BMICH. There he made a stirring address on poverty and its alleviation. In the course of his address he asked why it was that when a tea bush or a rubber tree showed some sign of disease, so many scientists and technical officers gave so much attention to it, whilst there was no such concern shown to the serious problems of human beings. He called into question the justice of contemporary social arrangements where material things received far greater priority than human beings.

One could tell, from his tone, manner and demeanor that he was genuinely concerned and even disturbed by the issue of the suffering caused by poverty. I found myself a member of the Board of Trustees of the Fund, which was chaired by Mr. R. Paskaralingam, Secretary to the Treasury. Professor G.L. Peiris, the Vice Chancellor of the University of Colombo was Vice-Chairman. He was also a member of the committee which gave final form and shape to the Trust. Susil Sirivardana, the ideologue was also a member of the Trust. He was also the Janasaviya Commissioner.

Susil brought great commitment and passion to the organization. Some found this to be a trifle irksome. I found it most of the time refreshing. The subject required that kind of intense preoccupation. Charitha Ratwatte, competent, pragmatic, irreverent and even unorthodox was the Director-General of the Trust. The Trust was funded by the World Bank and Germany’s KFW. The UNDP had a component and the government also put in some funds. It worked through NGOs with grass-root level experience of poverty alleviation and training. The government gave money to the Trust, and the Trust in turn on-lent to NGOs keeping a spread for itself.

As was to be expected, it took sometime for this new concept to take root. In the meantime, there were substantial problems between some of the NGOs and the Trust, the NGOs accusing the Trust of being bureaucratic and insensitive, and the Trust in turn charging them with being ideological, theoretical and impractical. It was a fascinating experience attempting to deal with such issues and trying to find some middle ground where the Trust would be able to function effectively. It was important not to lose sight of the larger goal of poverty reduction and concentrate on the necessity of minimizing the incidence and duration of elegant debates on ideology and philosophy.

HSBC Ceylon Literary and Arts Festival Opens with Call to Inspire a New Generation

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.