Browns Pharmaceuticals partners with DFCC Bank and Market-Oriented Dairy to empower local entrepreneurs

In keeping with its vision of fostering the growth of Sri Lanka’s dairy sector, Browns Pharmaceuticals recently collaborated with DFCC Bank PLC and Market-Oriented Dairy (MOD) through its innovative ‘Kiri Wyawasabhiman’ Loyalty Program. This trifold partnership aims to support dairy entrepreneurs across the nation during challenging times by offering seamless access to essential products and services, along with various concessions and customised financial products.

Through its Micro, Small and Medium Enterprise (MSME) scheme, DFCC Bank will afford dairy entrepreneurs a host of exclusive benefits such as special interest rates, flexible payment schemes and discounts on drugs, medicine and machinery from Browns Pharmaceuticals along with capacity development programs that will aid and deliver 360-solutions to foster business growth.

The MoU stands out with its ternary approach, combining Browns’ 150-year legacy of trust, island-wide network, and inimitable after-sales service with DFCC Bank’s expertise in MSME financing within the agriculture sector and its dynamic financial product portfolio. Alongside MOD’s credibility and resources, this collaboration creates a robust launchpad for dairy entrepreneurs to thrive.

Cluster Chief Operating Officer – Pharmaceuticals, Consumer & Integrated Engineering Solutions, Browns Group, Mangala Wijesinghe stated, “This dynamic partnership between DFCC Bank and MOD aligns with Browns Pharmaceuticals’ vision of amplifying the nation’s dairy sector by offering solutions that are not temporary, but long-lasting and impactful. We at Browns, remain committed to the market’s growth and sustainability while looking forward to seeing the benefits of this MoU come to fruition.”

A strategic business unit of Brown and Company PLC and backed by a 150-year-old heritage of trust, Browns Pharmaceuticals commenced its operations in 1990 to offer all-inclusive solutions to advance animal health in Sri Lanka. As the industry leader for biological products in the country, its four main market segments include aquaculture, companion animals, poultry and dairy.

Sri Lanka Insurance Life at the Jaffna Nallur Festival – 2024

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.