Sajith Premadasa accuses Govt. of using PTA to suppress activists

Slams Govt. for contradicting pre-election promises by using PTA to suppress media and social media activists

Claims activists who supported AKD’s campaign are being hunted under the law

Urges Govt. to align its actions with its promises and says it must walk the talk

Opposition leader Sajith Premadasa has accused the Government of contradicting its pre-election promises by using the Prevention of Terrorism Act (PTA) to suppress media and social media activists.

Addressing Parliament yesterday during a debate on President Anura Kumara Dissanayake’s policy statement, Premadasa criticised the Government for continuing to enforce the controversial legislation it had vowed to repeal before coming to power.

“Social media played a crucial role in helping the Government secure its large electoral mandate,” Premadasa said. “Yet, after coming to power, the Government is using the very Act it promised to abolish to target social media activists. Is it fair to engage in a media crackdown using the PTA? The same activists who supported your campaign are now being hunted under this law,” he said.

Premadasa highlighted the contradiction between the Government’s campaign rhetoric and its actions, accusing it of curtailing media freedoms, free speech, and citizens’ rights. He urged the Government to align its actions with its promises, stating, “You have to walk the talk.”

While emphasising the Samagi Jana Balawegaya’s (SJB) policy of supporting good initiatives and opposing harmful ones, Premadasa also stressed the importance of providing alternatives. “We call on the Government to end this repression and ensure its policies reflect the values it claimed to uphold during the election campaign,” he added.

The Police recently arrested four suspects for allegedly sharing misleading content on social media related to Maaveerar Naal celebrations. According to authorities, the arrests were made under Section 120 of the Penal Code and at least three of them were also arrested under provisions of the PTA. One of the suspects, identified as Kelum Harshana, has since been released on bail.