US military will livestream firing squad execution of Fort Hood shooter

(euronews) - Convicted military base shooter Nidal Hasan's execution will take place on 3 December at Fort Hood military base, where he committed the shooting. It will be the first US military execution carried out by a firing squad since World War II.

The firing squad execution of Fort Hood shooter Nidal Malik Hasan will be livestreamed, the Pentagon said Thursday, a controversial revelation about plans for the first military execution by firing squad since World War II after Defence Secretary Pete Hegseth had described it as being "public."

"The livestreaming of an execution is tantamount to a public execution and would breach the absolute prohibition of torture," said the UN Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights.

The UN body said it had made similar statements about public executions in Afghanistan and Iran, saying they "constitute a form of cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment".

Nidal Hasan, a US Army psychiatrist, shot and killed 13 people and injured 32 others at Fort Hood, Texas, in 2009.

"We are going to make sure that people are able to watch it, that it's public", this is how US Defence Secretary Pete Hegseth announced the "public" execution of convicted military base shooter Nidal Hasan.

"People need to understand that... there's serious consequences for these types of things", said Hegseth.

His execution by firing squad will be livestreamed on 3 December; it will be the first execution by the US military in more than 65 years, and the first carried out by firing squad since World War II.

"I kind of like the mentality we had in World War II, which was win, which was understand when the enemy attacks you, you need to stand your ground", Hegseth said.

Officials in the Pentagon clarified Thursday that the execution would be livestreamed and that more details would follow.

The revelation from Hegseth about the public nature of the execution has raised further questions about how the death penalty is carried out in the US, especially after the botched lethal injection of Christa Pike in Tennessee.