SriLankan Airlines and Air Seychelles embark on a codeshare partnership

SriLankan Airlines, the national carrier of Sri Lanka and Air Seychelles, the national airline of the Republic of Seychelles, have embarked on a codeshare partnership, ushering in seamless travel to multiple new destinations throughout Asia, Africa and Australia for their passengers flying between Colombo and Mahé.

Connecting people and places across continents, the collaboration empowers SriLankan Airlines to amplify its position and reach in Africa and passengers of the airline to travel conveniently between Colombo and Mahé twice a week. For Air Seychelles, over 20 destinations are included in the partnership, which includes much requested destinations such as Sydney and Melbourne in Australia as well as other popular stops in India, Thailand, Malaysia and Singapore.

This new codeshare agreement will allow SriLankan Airlines and Air Seychelles to place their codes on each other’s flights and enable passengers to continue their journey conveniently using a single booking and with their luggage checked in all the way to the final destination. It also means passengers can book their travels with both airlines, through online travel agencies, as well as with local travel agents.

Richard Nuttall, Chief Executive Officer of SriLankan Airlines stated, “We are pleased to boost our codeshare network and presence in the African region through this new partnership. We look forward to working with Air Seychelles to provide our customers more African destination options in the coming years.”

Charles Johnson, Air Seychelles’ Chief Commercial Officer shares “Now that we have been flying to Colombo for over 9 months, the twice-weekly flights have proven successful. The next step to solidifying our relationship is with this code-share, allowing even more passengers the convenience of a single ticket to more points served by our partner in Asia and Australia.”

SriLankan modifying flight paths to Europe amidst Israel Iran tensions

Applications open for  ‘Wasath Siriya- 2024’ New Year Festival competitions

Rainwater harvesting is an essential step to stave off impending disaster

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.