Sri Lanka showcases excellence at Grüne Woche 2026 in Berlin

The Delegation of German Industry and Commerce in Sri Lanka (AHK Sri Lanka) successfully organised the Sri Lankan National Pavilion at Grüne Woche, the world’s largest B2C trade fair for food, beverages, and agriculture, currently taking place in Berlin, Germany.

Grüne Woche attracts over 400,000 international visitors annually and serves as a premier global platform connecting producers, traders, and consumers. This year’s exhibition holds special significance as Grüne Woche celebrates its 100th anniversary, making Sri Lanka’s participation in this milestone event particularly meaningful.

At the Sri Lankan National Pavilion, a diverse range of high-quality products were showcased, including Ceylon Tea, Ceylon Cinnamon, coconut-based products, handicrafts, gems and jewellery. These products received a warm and positive response from buyers and visitors from across the world, highlighting Sri Lanka’s strong potential in international markets.

As the main organiser of the Sri Lankan National Pavilion, AHK Sri Lanka is convinced that Grüne Woche provides an excellent platform for Sri Lankan small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs). The exhibition enables exporters to explore opportunities to enter the EU and German markets, connect with potential buyers and partners, and gain valuable insights into consumer preferences in international markets.

Cinnamon Miracle Chairman Gihan De Silva, stated “Being part of the Sri Lankan National Pavilion allowed us to showcase the authenticity of Ceylon Cinnamon. The interest from German and EU buyers was positive, and this platform has helped us better understand market requirements.”

“This was a great opportunity for SMEs like us to test our products in the EU market. Direct interaction with consumers helped us gain insights that are difficult to achieve through other channel, ”

“Trade fairs such as Grüne Woche are powerful platforms for Sri Lankan exporters and SMEs. With the right strategy and consistent participation, we can increase the visibility of our products, strengthen buyer confidence, and unlock bigger opportunities across the EU and German markets.” AHK Sri Lanka Head of Corporate Affairs and Export Promotion Malintha Gajanayake mentioned.

The pavilion was honoured by the visit of Ambassador of Sri Lanka to Germany, Varuni Muthukumarana, along with officials from the Sri Lankan Embassy in Berlin, who extended their support and encouragement to the participating Sri Lankan exporters.

As the official representative of bilateral economic relations between Sri Lanka and Germany, AHK Sri Lanka remains firmly committed to supporting Sri Lankan SMEs in accessing the EU and German markets, fostering trade partnerships, and promoting Sri Lanka’s products on global platforms.