Former president’s backers want to form strong opposition, not govt: ex MP

ECONOMYNEXT — Former Sri Lanka Podujana Peramuna MP Premnath Dolawatte said the objective of the MPs that supported former President Ranil Wickremesinghe is not to form a government but to form a strong opposition.

Speaking to reporters following a meeting between SLPP and other ex MPs who backed Wickremesinghe during the presidential election, Dolawatte said they do not intend to sabotage the new Janatha Vimukthi Peramuna (JVP)-led National People’s Power (NPP) government.

“At this time, we wish to respect the people’s choice. The people will give the JVP the ability to govern. We must form a strong opposition. We don’t want to grab government power so that President Dissanayake finds it difficult to work. That’s not our aim. Our goal is to build a strong opposition and support the good things the government does and criticise the bad,” the former MP said.

“There are talks. It’s not about them coming here to join the gas cylinder. There are talks on forming a broad opposition,” he said when asked about reported attempts at a reconciliation between Wickremesinghe’s United National Party (UNP) and rival presidential candidate Sajith Premadasa’s Samagi Jana Balawegaya (SJB).

Premadasa, who has been named as the SJB’s prime ministerial “candidate” for the parliamentary election scheduled for November 14, has insisted that he does not wish to work with Wickremesinghe, which would effectively rule out a reunification of the old UNP. The SJB is a splinter group of the UNP that broke off leading up to the 2020 parliamentary polls.

Wickremesinghe, for his part, has said he does not wish to contest future elections in keeping with a UNP tradition, according to several party spokesmen who spoke to the media on Tuesday.

UNP deputy leader Ruwan Wijewardene said on Tuesday that the party has invited senior members of the SJB for discussions on a possible alliance targeting the next parliamentary election which will likely be held in December 2024 following a widely anticipated dissolution of parliament by newly sworn-in President Anura Kumara Dissanayake. (Colombo/Sep27/2024)