Thus spake the Prez

President Anura Kumara Dissanayake has strongly defended two political appointees occupying the top positions in the Ministry of Public Security and the Criminal Investigation Department (CID). The modus operandi adopted by him to support his brief for them is a textbook example of ‘straw man’, a logical fallacy, which involves recasting opponents’ arguments into weaker versions that are easier to refute instead of addressing stronger, substantive issues.

President Dissanayake has advanced several arguments, imputing improper motives to his political opponents for their opposition to the appointment of NPP member, retired SSP Shani Abeysekera, as the CID Director. Abeysekera is an investigator nonpareil, whose investigations have led to the conviction of almost all the accused in cases filed by the CID, the President has said, insisting that there is documentary proof to support his claim, but he has not cared to make it public.

The main argument against Abeysekera’s post-retirement appointment as the CID Director is not based on his skills but a glaring conflict of interest on his part, arising mainly from two factors. He is a prominent member of the NPP’s Retired Police Collective, and therefore cannot be expected to act impartially when investigating matters that could jeopardise the interests of his party, upon which he is dependent to hold his current position, as a political appointee. No other government catapulted a party member in retirement to the post of the CID Director. The President has also evaded one of the main reasons why Abeysekera’s controversial appointment has come under criticism—the CID’s failure, under his watch, to prevent the National Thowheed Jamath (NTJ) from carrying out the Easter Sunday terror attacks in 2019. If the President’s claim is true that Abeysekera is a maven in the police, why did the CID, under his supervision, fail to prevent the Easter Sunday attacks, despite the availability of actionable intelligence? The CID kept on barking up the wrong tree following the execution-style killings of two policemen at Vavunathivu in 2018. Some former LTTE cadres were arrested on suspicion although the NTJ was responsible for those crimes. The CID later claimed that it had been misled by military intelligence. It is unthinkable that the CID, under a person the NPP likens to Sherlock Holmes, was thrown off the trail of a terrorist outfit!

There is no way Abeysekera or current Secretary to the Ministry of Public Security and Head of the NPP’s Retired Police Collective SDIG (Rtd.) Ravi Seneviratne, who was the SDIG in charge of the CID, in 2019, can absolve themselves of the responsibility for the CID’s lapses that led to the Easter Sunday attacks. There is a serious conflict of interest on the part of the duo, and they cannot be expected to act impartially regarding the ongoing investigations into the Easter Sunday carnage. It has been revealed that the family of Mohamed Ibrahim, a JVP National List nominee for the 2015 general election, funded the Easter Sunday terror project. Ibrahim’s two sons took part in the suicide bomb attacks in 2019. This dimension of the terror strikes must be probed thoroughly, but how can two NPP members be expected to maintain neutrality and an open mind, as the Secretary to the Public Security Ministry and the CID Director?

President Dissanayake’s arguments rely more on pathos, which appeals to an audience’s emotions, than on logos, which appeals to their logic and reason. The President has said Abeysekera was unjustly kept behind bars by the Rajapaksa government. He went on to say that Abeysekera underwent heart surgery while in remand prison. Abeysekera’s sister wept while describing his condition, the President has said. The Rajapaksas abused power to launch witch-hunts against their rivals, and among their victims are former war-time Army Commander Field Marshal Sarath Fonseka and former Chief Justice Dr. Shirani Bandaranaike. But it is self-defeating for the President to highlight the injustices the Rajapaksas inflicted on Abeysekera, who is now in charge of investigations against them. One could argue that the government has handpicked Abeysekera as the CID Director because he is driven by a desire to take revenge from the Rajapaksas, whom the NPP is all out to destroy politically. There is provision for remedy even when a judge is considered prejudiced—recusal—but no such safeguard is available when the CID Director happens to be prejudiced!

President Dissanayake has chosen to ignore a leaked audio clip of a telephone conversation between Abeysekera and the then Deputy Minister Ranjan Ramanayake, during the Yahapalana government. Abeysekera, who was the CID Director at that time, is heard discussing an investigation with Ramanayake and offering to wash pots and pans in the latter’s house.

President Dissanayake has turned a blind eye to the issue of conflict of interest on the part of Seneviratne, who was the SDIG in charge of the CID at the time of the Easter Sunday attacks. He has also ignored the Opposition’s claim that Seneviratne misused his authority, as the Secretary to the Ministry of Public Security to have a drunk driving charge dropped in a case against him for causing a road accident in late 2023.

The government has rejected out of hand the Alwis Committee report, which has held Abeysekera and Seneviratne accountable for the CID’s failure to prevent the Easter Sunday terror attacks. It has said the Chairperson of the Committee, former High Court Judge A. N. J de Alwis, was prejudiced against Abeysekera and Seneviratne. Similarly, one could argue that the integrity of the investigations being conducted by the CID into the Easter Sunday bombings, with Abeysekera and Seneviratne in their current positions, is also compromised. No amount of glib talk can justify the appointment of two prominent NPP members as the Head of the Public Security Ministry and the CID Director.

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.