Cuisines of the World with Nations Trust Bank American Express

Nations Trust Bank American Express is excited to announce the launch of the ‘Cuisines of the World’ campaign, offering Cardmembers exclusive experiences and significant savings at a variety of top-tier restaurants across Sri Lanka. This initiative will feature a diverse range of global cuisines each week during June and July 2024.

Throughout these two months, each week, will spotlight a different cuisine together with attractive offers from restaurants that offer the respective cuisine. Cardmembers can enjoy a multi-cuisine culinary journey with their friends and family.

Niluka Gunatilake, Head of Cards at Nations Trust Bank, stated, “With ‘Cuisines of the World,’ our goal is to provide our Cardmembers with a unique culinary experience that mirrors the diverse tastes and preferences of our community. Additionally, this offers a wonderful opportunity for them to spend quality time and create lasting memories with their loved ones.”

The campaign kicks off with Chinese cuisine, followed by Indian, Japanese, Thai, and more, with a different cuisine highlighted each week. Over these 8 weeks of culinary delight, Cardmembers can enjoy savings of up to 25% at renowned dining establishments, including restaurants from Taj Samudra, Kingsbury, Cinnamon Grand and Cinnamon Lakeside, as well as popular eateries like Nara Thai, Dindigul Thalappakatti, Street Burger, and Ginza Hohsen.

Nations Trust Bank PLC serves a diverse range of customers across Consumer, Commercial and Corporate segments through multi-channel customer touch points spanning both physical and digital. The Bank is focused on digital empowerment through cutting-edge digital banking technologies, and pioneered FriMi, Sri Lanka’s leading digital banking experience. Nations Trust Bank PLC is an issuer and sole acquirer of American Express Cards in Sri Lanka with market leadership in the premium segments.

Loops Integrated ends The Four A’s Advertising Awards 2024 on a high

Nations Trust Bank – Symphony Orchestra of Sri Lanka Concert concludes on a successful note

Nations Trust Bank invites cardmembers to Spark Connections #WithAmex this Avurudu season

Nations Trust Bank, Melwire Rolling reach MCA ‘D’ division cricket final

Nations Trust Bank American Express unveils the ‘Most Wonderful Time of the Year’

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.