Leadership transition at Good Life X: Strategic leap into future

From left: Christina Gunasinghe, Randhula de Silva, Emma de Silva and Vihangun Ariyaratne

Good Life X (GLX) has announced a new chapter in its journey as it welcomes key leadership changes that strategically position the organisation for expanded impact and growth.

Effective 2 January 2025, Emma de Silva will assume the role of Chief Executive Officer (CEO), and Christina Gunasinghe will take on the role of Chief Operating Officer (COO). Alongside these appointments, GLX Founder and outgoing CEO Randhula de Silva, will transition into the roles of Chairperson and Director of Innovation and Thought Leadership, while Vihangun Ariyaratne the outgoing COO, will step into the role of Director of Strategy and Sustainable Growth.

This carefully planned evolution underscores GLX’s commitment to fostering regenerative innovation. Over the past six months, the leadership team has worked diligently to ensure a seamless transition, reinforcing GLX’s role as a catalyst for positive change.

“This transition is far from ordinary; it’s a strategic milestone for GLX. We view regenerative organisations as thriving ecosystems, where natural succession fosters resilience and sustains growth,” shared Randhula de Silva. “Early roots enrich the soil, paving the way for the next generation of leadership to carry forward our vision with renewed energy and perspective.”

Emma de Silva, a first-generation Sri Lankan-American, has been a key figure at GLX since 2021, bringing visionary perspectives and a profound commitment to the organisation’s mission. Her extensive networks and passion for meaningful impact position her perfectly to lead GLX into its next phase. “Our work and our team represent the belief in the goodness we have in our island – from the people, the culture and the natural abundance around us. This is exactly what has brought me back and kept me here for four years and I’m looking forward to continuing to grow Good Life X to enable more collaborations and interventions to bring Sri Lanka to the world and the world to Sri Lanka,” said Emma de Silva.

Christina Gunasinghe who has been contributing to the work of GLX since 2023, brings a wealth of experience from the corporate and startup growth sectors, combined with her unwavering commitment to operational excellence, will strengthen GLX’s foundation, enabling it to scale with purpose and precision. “When personal purpose aligns with that of the organisation, career transcends to become a way of life. I’m honoured to join GLX’s leadership, and excited to help create a regenerative future,” said Christina Gunasinghe.

As Chairperson and Director of Innovation and Thought Leadership, Randhula will amplify GLX’s ability to innovate and catalyse change in its focus areas and deepen its impact. Meanwhile, Vihangun Ariyaratne’s expertise in sustainable growth will solidify GLX’s leadership in creating transformative solutions across South Asia.

These leadership appointments reflect GLX’s philosophy of intentional growth and regeneration, empowering individuals to lead with purpose. With a dynamic team at the helm, the GLX family looks forward to this next chapter with optimism and gratitude, confident in the collective potential to shape a brighter, more regenerative future.