Ceylinco Life treats Family Savari winners to a day of unbridled fun at Pearl Bay

A welcome opportunity to cool off with the thrills and spills of Pearl Bay – Sri Lanka newest theme park with water features – was provided to nearly a thousand people recently, as Ceylinco Life’s ‘Family Savari’ promotion for 2024 got underway in characteristic scale.

The group, comprising of 250 Ceylinco Life policyholders and their families, were given the run of the park for a day, with the water park area reserved exclusively for them by the life insurance market leader.

With all the rides and other attractions paid for and refreshments provided, the visitors simply had to surrender to the unbridled fun in store for them, courtesy of their life insurance partner. The Family Savari Brand Ambassadors – the popular actor Roshan Ranawana, his wife Kushlani and their son Mineth joined in the activities.

Speaking at the commencement of the excursion, Ceylinco Life Executive Director/Chief Operating Officer Ranga Abeynayake said the Family Savari mega promotion now in its 17th year, is the largest and most generous promotion of its kind in Sri Lanka’s life insurance industry, and was designed to emphasise the importance of families spending time together. “Family Savari is more than just a promotion now, as it has created strong and enduring bonds and memories for our policyholders across Sri Lanka, and contributed to promoting understanding and unity,” he said.

Besides the 250 policyholders that won a day-long visit to Peal Bay, five Ceylinco Life policyholder families won an all-expenses-paid holiday to Türkiye and another 10 families a holiday in Malaysia. These tours will take place in May and June respectively.

Family Savari 17 marks the return of overseas holidays for the family as the main loyalty reward under this annual extravaganza, which rewards a total of 265 policyholders and their family members this year, for their loyalty to Ceylinco Life. The mega promotion has to date rewarded more than 35,000 people in this manner, and previous grand-prize winning families have visited Australia, Italy, England, Germany, Switzerland, Japan, and France, while other winners have toured China, Dubai, and Singapore.

Adjudged Sri Lanka’s Brand of the Year for the second successive year in 2023, Ceylinco Life was also named one of the 10 Most Admired Companies in Sri Lanka in 2023 by the International Chamber of Commerce Sri Lanka (ICCSL) and the Chartered Institute of Management Accountants (CIMA), and was ranked the ‘Most Valuable Insurance Brand in Sri Lanka’ across both life and general insurance categories in 2023 by Brand Finance.

Ceylinco Life has been the country’s leading life insurer for 20 of the 36 years it has been in existence and provides innovative life insurance solutions which offer protection while de-risking the goals and ambitions of the Company’s policyholders.

‘Dialog Enterprise Partners with UTECH Technologies for Industry 4.0 Transformation’.

Ceylinco Life begins 18th year of ‘Waidya Hamuwa’ with 4 free medical camps

Ceylinco Life wins SAFA Gold and TAGS Silver for 2022 Annual Report

Ceylinco Life is Sri Lanka’s ‘Brand of the Year’ for second successive year

Ceylinco Life draws early winners of ‘Family Savari’ mega promotion

Ceylinco Life draws early winners of Family Savari mega promotion

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.