SLIM launches National Sales Awards 2026

From left: National Sales Award 2026 Project Chairman Damith Jayawardena, Sri Lanka Institute of Marketing Vice President Events and Sustainability Raji David, Sri Lanka Institute of Marketing President Enoch Perera, National Sales Awards 2026 Deputy Head of Jury Jerome Jayasinghe and Sri Lanka Institute of Marketing Chief Executive Officer Chamil Wickramasinghe

The Sri Lanka Institute of Marketing (SLIM) has officially announced the launch of National Sales Awards (NSA) 2026, marking the prestigious platform’s 25th anniversary milestone in recognising and rewarding exceptional sales professionals across the country.

The SLIM NSA has been Sri Lanka’s premier platform for 25 years, recognising individuals and teams that have excelled in sales performance, leadership, innovation and business growth. By honouring the professionals who are essential to the advancement of organisations and the national economy, NSA 2026 continues this legacy.

The official launch now opens entries for organisations and sales professionals representing diverse industries across Sri Lanka. Top-performing individuals and teams that have shown excellence in their respective fields are urged to be nominated by corporate organisations, CEOs, heads of sales, HR and talent development teams and sales professionals.

Through its transparent and rigorous evaluation process, which is carried out by renowned industry leaders and experts, the NSA has established a strong reputation over the years as the country’s most credible and prestigious sales recognition platform. In Sri Lanka’s corporate sector, the platform has grown to be a benchmark for professional recognition and career achievement.

SLIM President Enoch Perera stated, “As we celebrate the NSA’s 25th anniversary, we are pleased to recognise a significant milestone in honouring Sri Lanka’s sales professionals who continue to propel businesses and the economy ahead.”

SLIM Vice President Events and Sustainability Rajiv David noted, “NSA 2026 emphasises how important sales professionals are to generating revenue, enterprise success and economic progress.”

SLIM Vice President Education and Research Manthika Ranasinghe emphasised, “Seeing so many SLIM Sales Diploma graduates contribute significantly to the sales community—some even going on to serve as the NSA jurors—is incredibly inspiring.”

SLIM NSA 2026 Deputy Head of Jury Jerome Jayasinghe highlighted, “The NSA has evolved into Sri Lanka’s most prestigious platform for recognising excellence within the sales fraternity and the 25th anniversary marks a significant milestone in that journey.”

SLIM NSA 2025 Project Chairman Damith Jayawardana stated, “As we celebrate this silver jubilee, NSA 2026 stands as both a tribute to the resilience and contribution of sales professionals and an ongoing commitment to enhancing the importance of the profession.”

SLIM CEO Chamil Wickramasinghe added, “In addition to inspiring and empowering the upcoming generation of sales leaders to propel growth and innovation across industries, the NSA has been a benchmark for excellence, professionalism, and performance for 25 years.”