Parliament turns orange against gender-based violence

Premier Dr. Harini Amarasuriya says media reporting should move beyond sensationalised narratives, focus on lived realities of women subjected to violence

Women Parliamentarians’ Caucus and Women and Child Affairs Minister Saroja Paulraj underscores Govt.’s stringent approach to addressing cybercrimes against women

Presents wristband with the message “End Gender Based Violence” to all MPs

The Parliament last Friday held a number of activities under the leadership of the Women Parliamentarians’ Caucus in support of the 16 Days of Activism against Gender Based Violence (GBV).

Women Parliamentarians and the staff of the Secretary General were dressed in orange to support the program.

Accordingly, a wristband with the message “End Gender Based Violence” was presented to Speaker Dr. Asoka Ranwala by the Deputy Chairpersons of Committees MP Hemali Weerasekara along with the other members of the Caucus.

The wristband was also presented to Prime Minister Dr.  Harini Amarasuriya, Leader of the House and Minister Bimal Rathnayake, Chief Government Whip and Minister Dr. Nalinda Jayatissa, Deputy Speaker Dr. Rizvie Salih, Opposition leader Sajith Premadasa and Chief Opposition Whip Gayantha Karunathilleka. Secretary General of the Parliament Kushani Rohanadeera was also present on the occasion.

All Members of Parliament were given the wristbands alongside a public pledge to end gender-based violence and promote gender equality.

During the media briefing held thereafter, representing the Women Parliamentarians’ Caucus Dr. Harini Amarasuriya emphasised the need for media reporting to move beyond sensationalised narratives and focus on the lived realities of women subjected to violence.

She noted that violence against women and children often originates not from strangers but from those closest to them.

Women Parliamentarians’ Caucus and Women and Child Affairs Chair Minister Saroja Paulraj highlighted the availability of the 1938 hotline for reporting violence against women and children assuring prompt action on such complaints.

She also underscored the Government’s stringent approach to addressing cybercrimes against women.

Paulraj further remarked that the Women Parliamentarians’ Caucus operates as a model within Parliament and the responsibility it bears in safeguarding the dignity and respect within Parliament determining how it will be the stepping stone for how all Sri Lankan women and children are being given dignity and respect as a whole.

Emphasising the significance of Parliament being the cornerstone of legislative authority, she reiterated that Parliament must lead by example in ensuring justice and equality for all citizens.