Wajira warns against traditional politics at Presidential Poll

UNP MP suggest engaging in traditional politics at Presidential Election could risk return to civil war

Says responsible parties should be held accountable for any potential third civil war

Expresses disappointment at dissemination of misleading information on Economic Transformation bill

Calls on voters to approach upcoming Presidential Election with focus on nation’s future and not out of hatred or revenge

United National Party (UNP) MP Wajira Abeywardana has issued a warning against adhering to traditional political ideologies in the upcoming Presidential Election, suggesting it could risk a return to civil war in the country.

Speaking at a press conference yesterday at the Presidential Media Centre (PMC), themed ‘Collective Path to a Stable Country,’ Abeywardana emphasised the critical nature of the upcoming election on 21 September, which will elect the 9th Executive President of Sri Lanka.

“If we continue with traditional political ideologies, caste-based politics, or religious divisions, the responsible parties should be held accountable for any potential civil war,” he said.

Abeywardana pointed out that Sri Lanka has a history of rebellions and civil wars, including a rebellion against the previous regime. He questioned whether voters would risk another civil war or choose to prevent such a scenario by their ballots on 21 September.

“During the country’s economic crisis, the Opposition did not take responsibility for rebuilding, leaving President Ranil Wickremesinghe, the sole UNP member in Parliament at the time, to secure the country’s future. On 22 July 2022, Wickremesinghe assumed the role of the 8th Executive President and committed to nation-building, introducing many reforms, including the Economic Transformation Act,” he said.

“While the new Economic Transformation Bill was unanimously passed by all 225 members of Parliament, it is unfortunate that some individuals have presented misleading ideas to the public,” Abeywardana noted.

He urged all political parties to set aside traditional divisions and unite behind the national plan to build the country.

“It’s disappointing that despite the unanimous support for the Economic Transformation Act, some MPs express conflicting views publicly,” he said. “They need to set aside their religious, caste, and political differences and work together on a national plan for the country’s development.”

Abeywardana emphasised President Wickremesinghe’s call for all parties to support a long-term national development program, putting aside individual policies to avoid undermining progress.

“To build this country, we need to collaborate on a national plan spanning 6 to 15 years,” he said. “This is why President Wickremesinghe is running for the presidential election as an independent candidate. It’s crucial that we stop misleading the public for political gain. There is no alternative path to recovering our nation.”

He also highlighted the importance of unity and prioritising the country’s well-being. “In a democracy, political parties have the right to express their opinions. However, we must avoid causing further harm to the country. Voters should approach the upcoming Presidential Election with a focus on the nation’s future, not out of hatred or revenge. This election should not be used as a means to undermine the country.” he said.