Sri Lanka SIS warned not to grant wage hike for protesting University staff: State Minister

ECONOMYNEXT – Sri Lanka’s State Intelligence Service (SIS) has warned the government not to grant a salary hike to protesting non-academic staff at the island nation’s state universities as it is a part of a greater plot, State Higher Education Minister Suren Raghavan said.

The State Minister’s revelation comes after more than two month of protest by the non-academic staff crippling the smooth operations in the island nation’s state universities.

Raghavan, however, promised a wage hike in 2025 budget and urged non-academic staff across all universities to resume work promptly, emphasizing the importance of minimizing disruptions for the youth who are the future leaders of the nation.

When asked if the protest has any political motive, the Minister said it was part of a greater plot though the demand is justifiable.

“That is what the State Intelligence Services told us,” he told EconomyNext responding to a question at a media briefing in Colombo on Friday (05).

“We were above to grant this. They (SIS) said no and this is only the beginning.  There were several other state institutions waiting (to protest for wage hike). So we can’t do this,” he said.

Treasury Secretary Mahinda Siriwardena has said for such a wage hike to all state workers would cost the government nearly 20 billion Sri Lanka rupees (US$66.4 million at 1$ = 300 LKR).

Raghavan said the government cannot afford to such amount at a time when the economy is just emerging from an unprecedented bankruptcy.

Nearly 14,600 non-academic employees from 17 state universities and 19 joint post-graduate institutions have been on strike for 65 days demanding higher wages.

The trade union action has severely disrupted the higher education sector and adversely affected the lives of 250,000 young undergraduates.

The State Minister said these youths have already faced significant mental strain from the Covid-19 pandemic in 2019, economic crises in 2020, and various challenges in 2021.

“It is a national tragedy that their lives have been further complicated by this strike,” he said.

“The demands of non-academic employees are reasonable. I promise that their requests will be forwarded to the Udaya Seneviratne Committee and included in the 2025 budget through President Ranil Wickremesinghe. Additionally, we are working to pay their two months’ salary and overtime.” (Colombo/July 05/2024)