MAS partners UNFPA to advance women’s health and wellbeing in apparel sector

Global apparel-tech conglomerate MAS and the United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA),signed a Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) on 28 November. This partnership marks the beginning of a year-long collaboration aimed at supporting women’s health and reproductive health.

The MOU consolidated a shared vision between MAS and UNFPA to increase investment into women’s health and wellbeing. It seeks to empower and encourage women and girls in the apparel sector to speak up and for corporates to create safe public spaces. Through the partnership, both organizations will work together to upgrade medical centers, conduct awareness programs, and establish wellness facilities in BOI zones accessible to employees of the apparel sector.

“Supporting women’s health and wellbeing isn’t just the right thing to do—it’s the smart thing to do for our communities and businesses. This partnership gives us a clear framework on how we can work together to make a meaningful difference. We’re proud to be part of this initiative, creating a positive impact for women, who are undoubtedly the backbone of the apparel industry.” Suren Fernando, CEO of MAS Holdings said.

“When businesses step up with workplace initiatives like this, they create awareness, but beyond that they drive investment, and make health and wellbeing services accessible at scale. It is about giving women across industries the support they need to thrive.”

“This partnership is a powerful example of what’s possible when corporate and global efforts come together to build safer, healthier environments for everyone, ultimately advancing health equity and gender parity. By creating safe public spaces and fostering collective action, we are empowering and encouraging women and girls in the apparel sector to invest in their health and wellbeing,” said UNFPA Representative Kunle Adeniyi.

Seylan Cards partners with FitsAir to continue its swipe and win promo

Spain Visa Application Centre launched in Colombo by BLS International

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.