Eva and Sri Lanka Red Cross launch nationwide menstrual health campaign for schools

Eva joined forces with the Sri Lanka Red Cross Society (SLRC) to launch an island-wide Menstrual Health and Hygiene Awareness Programme.

Aimed at reaching schools across the island during 2025, this initiative seeks to equip students with vital knowledge while addressing stigmas surrounding menstruation.

The launch event was held recently at the Sri Lanka Red Cross premises in Colombo, marking the beginning of this transformative effort, setting the stage for a nationwide movement towards enabling awareness, knowledge, and inclusion.

The Eva-SLRC Menstrual Health & Hygiene Awareness Programme, conducted with the support of the Ministry of Education, represents a unified effort to transform societal attitudes toward menstruation. This initiative seeks to foster a culture where menstruation is celebrated as a symbol of health and vitality, rather than a source of shame. By engaging students through dynamic workshops, interactive discussions, and access to the right information, the programme aims to empower young individuals to view menstruation with confidence and dignity, promoting a new generation of understanding and acceptance.

Vice President of the Sri Lanka Red Cross Society, Jagath Abeysinghe, stated, “Together with Eva, we are striving to reshape perceptions and build a future where young women can embrace menstruation with dignity and confidence. Taking an inclusive approach, we aim to maximise our reach and spread awareness about this important social issue.”

Additional Education Director – Administration at the Western Province Education Department, Ms. H. N. Perera added, “Education is not just about academics but understanding one another. This initiative addresses a pressing need for our youth, empowering both girls and boys to approach menstruation with sensitivity and respect.”

Suresh Srinivasan – Group CEO, Capital Maharaja Group, said “Through this initiative, we hope to encourage women and girls to take pride in their femininity and approach womanhood with confidence. It will also drive better understanding and acceptance of menstruation as a natural and healthy biological process, empowering women to realise their true potential, unburdened by age-old stigmas.”

Students from Sri Lanka achieve top results in Outstanding Cambridge Learner Awards

CEAT launches new paradigm ‘Europe Range’ of high performance radial tyres in Sri Lanka

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.