DFCC Bank launches online digital onboarding facility

A pioneer in digital banking and service delivery, DFCC Bank has rolled out its much-awaited network wide 100%-online digital customer onboarding platform. This marks an important milestone on the bank’s digital journey, empowering new customers to open accounts and other facilities online with no reliance on manual or paper-based processes. Accordingly, customers can now enjoy unparalleled ease and convenience, signing up for DFCC Bank’s services from anywhere at any time. There is no longer any need to travel to the bank, stand in queues, fill out paper forms, or wait for accounts to be activated. DFCC Bank now ensures that the entire process is digitised for a friendly, seamless, and virtually instant experience. Customers will also have access to live agent support and assistance during onboarding.

This facility is now open to all individuals with a valid NIC or EIC, including teenagers above 16 years of age. It’s accessible 24/7 via https://applyonline.dfcc.lk/ Once the online customer onboarding process is complete, customers gain access to our range of services, including various digital banking channels such as DFCC wallet, Online Banking, E-statements, DFCC Alerts, and Debit Cards.

Discussing the significance of transitioning to a 100% digital onboarding process, Aasiri Iddamalgoda – Senior Vice President of Retail Banking and SME at DFCC Bank, said, “In our pursuit of creating a unique, friendly, and seamless banking experience, we have recognised that Sri Lankans seek convenience and ease of access. As a champion of digital empowerment, we’ve collaborated with all stakeholders to introduce a truly digital and online customer onboarding platform, enabling genuinely online account opening. This is a landmark achievement that aligns our customer experience with global standards for convenience, simplicity, and ease. It also supports our sustainability goals, reducing our reliance on paper and customers’ need to visit the bank physically.”

The new platform also enables other convenient features to ensure a truly seamless experience. These include checking on your application status, opening both LKR and FCY accounts, saving your partially completed application and resuming the process seamlessly from where you left off at a later time. Accordingly, with this move, DFCC Bank has taken a quantum leap towards its goals for digitisation and digitalisation of its services and processes, both internally and externally, thus rendering it indeed at the forefront of the digital banking revolution in Sri Lanka.

Pathfinder Foundation and Ananta Aspen Centre lead India-Sri Lanka Physical & Digital Connectivity Dialogue

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.