The dawn of another Independence Day

Another Independence Day has dawned. Elaborate arrangements have been made to celebrate it on a grand scale. The national flag will flutter at full mast majestically to the roll of drums and the blare of trumpets. A colourful parade and a fly-past will be among the day’s many attractions. A ceremony with such pomp and circumstance is an occasion for reflection.

Sri Lanka is celebrating the 78th year of Independence while emerging from its worst-ever economic crisis. There is a long way to go before it achieves full economic recovery. Much is being spoken about the need for economic reforms, and their importance cannot be overstated. But the question is whether they alone will help usher in national progress.

Since 1948, Sri Lanka has seen various political and economic reform movements. Its economy and political system have undergone radical changes during the past several decades. and reforms have yielded mixed results, with progress in some areas and setbacks in others. The current economic crisis and the ongoing recovery efforts have necessitated a national strategy to reform the economy. Experiments with political, constitutional and electoral reforms are far from over.

Successive governments have experimented with economic and political reforms. On the political front, the executive presidential system has survived several half-hearted attempts to abolish it and reintroduce the Westminster system. Politically-motivated amendments have made the Constitution look like a badly edited periodical, according to cynics. The electoral system has become an unholy mess. Provincial Council elections have fallen between two electoral systems, so to speak; at present, they cannot be held under either the Proportional Representation system or the Mixed Proportional system.

Meanwhile, the blame for the sorry state of affairs on all fronts has been laid solely at the feet of politicians. But it should be apportioned to the people, for it is they who elect governments. They vote in such a way that one wonders whether they are capable of making rational decisions and choices despite the country’s high literacy rate. True, politicians deserve the flak they receive for corruption, other malpractices and, above all, the country’s failure to achieve development, but it takes two to tango.

The state service has earned notoriety for inefficiency, incompetence, and delays. Decades of politicisation alone cannot be blamed for this situation. Sri Lankans’ attitude to work leaves much to be desired. The country is yet to develop a strong national work ethic, which is a prerequisite for enhancing national productivity and achieving development. Trade unions perennially make demands but rarely turn the searchlight inwards, much less concentrate on their duties and responsibilities.

The public apparently does not care much about civic duties and responsibilities. Tax compliance is extremely low, and indiscipline is widespread. Roads are characterised by utter chaos, and accidents, mostly caused by reckless driving, claim about seven or eight lives a day. Complaints of sexual harassment of women in buses and trains abound.

The focus of the government, the Opposition, the media, religious leaders and others is currently on educational reforms, which have apparently taken precedence over economic reforms. There are media reports about discussions on constitutional and electoral reforms as well. But there has been no serious discussion on the much-needed social reforms.

Social reforms are organised efforts aimed at not only promoting justice, equality and inclusion across political, economic, cultural and social spheres in a country but also helping bring about attitudinal changes and positive mindsets essential for a nation to adapt to changing times, face challenges, achieve its development goals and progress. It is time serious thought was given to social reforms.

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.