Uber Eats promises to deliver ‘almost anything’ in Sri Lanka: launches campaign focussed on deliveries beyond food

Uber Eats, Sri Lanka’s favourite delivery app, has unveiled a new campaign ‘Get Almost, Almost Anything’ focused on its expanded range of products, offering much more than just food delivery. Customers can use the platform to order cooked meals, groceries, health and beauty products, pet food and more, catering to a variety of everyday needs.

This campaign underscores Uber Eats’ growing role in the daily lives of Sri Lankans, with seamless delivery of their favorite food items and beverages; groceries for cooking at home; gifts for loved ones, and other essential items.

Varun Wijewardane, Country Manager, Uber Delivery – Sri Lanka, said: “Over the last five years, we’ve become the go-to app for people in Sri Lanka and become an essential part of their lives. As Uber Eats evolves, we wish to reiterate our commitment to continue bringing the best of Uber to the country and become a one-stop shop to meet daily needs of our customers beyond just food cravings. With a few clicks, customers can get almost anything from food to beauty products to flowers and more.”

On the list of most popular items ordered on the app, rice & curry continues to top the list in the ‘cooked meal’ category, while Chinese Rolls are the hot favorite when it comes to satisfying Sri Lankans’ demand for Short Eats. Carrots and eggs are the most ordered grocery items along with Keeri Samba. But beyond food and grocery items, Sri Lankans turn to their favorite delivery app for a wide range of items such as:

Cleaning supplies: Dishwash Liquids; Toilet Rolls; Garbage Bags; and, Washing Powders

Electronics: Phone accessories; home appliances; Chargers, Cables, Earphones, Phone Screen Protectors, Laptop Accessories, Power Banks, Bluetooth Speakers.

Prior to the launch in Sri Lanka, the global campaign ‘Get Almost, Almost Anything’ has been executed in Australia, US, Mexico, and Taiwan. To help bring this campaign to life in Sri Lanka, Uber Eats has partnered with well-known local personalities such as stand-up comic Dominic Kellar; singer Hana Shafa; and content creator Gangulee Walpola. Through fun and engaging conversations, these celebrities will show Sri Lankans the diverse options Uber Eats provides, catering to all tastes, occasions, and budgets.

Since its entry in 2018, Uber Eats has rapidly grown to become a beloved app in the island nation.

Sri Lanka Banks’ Association congratulates new President, assures support for nation building

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.