Big scene for Mirage

Doing it in the Seychelles and keeping the folks entertained at the popular Lo Brizan pub/restaurant, at the Hilton Labriz Resort, is the group Mirage.

They perform six days of the week (taking a break on Tuesdays) from 8.00 pm to 11.00 pm.

“We love the setup here”, said the group’s leader Donald Pieries, adding that the atmosphere is wonderful.

Reports indicate that female vocalist Danu, has turned out to be quite popular as she sings in five languages – English, Russian, French, German and Creole, the language spoken in the Seychelles – and is also seen with the crowd, encouraging them to dance and sing along with her.

Mirage will be back, in Colombo, next month, and will be featured at the prestigious Gatz, Cinnamon Life, every Saturday; at Mamas Beach, in Hikkaduwa, on Tuesdays; and at Chill Colombo (Port City), on Fridays.

They also have a very special date, at Gatz, on 20th September, when they will partner Noeline Honter, the renowned Sri Lankan singer, now based in Australia, to entertain guests from 8.00 pm to 12.00 am.

In fact, she was a part of the Mirage setup when they performed in Europe for a decade, and also played in Dubai for 13 years (1994-2007) at the Marco Polo.

Well, I’m told they plan to recreate those golden days when they team up again at Gatz on 20th September, right here in Colombo.

Noeline, who has made a significant impact in the Western music scene, will also be doing her thing with Terry & The Big Spenders, on Sunday, 24th August, at Gatz.

The multi-faceted celebrity, who is known for her versatility in singing various genres, like Rhythm and Blues, Soul, Pop, Rock, and Jazz, will also be seen in action at ‘Vibes of Yesterday’, on 30th August, a musical event which aims to support the Apeksha Hospital in Maharagama.

For the record, Noeline has performed in numerous cities worldwide, including Los Angeles, London, Paris, and Melbourne.

Mirage will be back in September and will be off to the Seychelles again, in early December, for the festive season, taking in the New Year’s Eve scene, as well.

One special day Donald and wife Jean will be enthusiastically looking forward to is 23rd August – their 50th wedding anniversary – and, I’m told, celebrations will be held at the Hilton Labriz Resort!

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.