Sri Lanka to host UN FAO’s 37th regional conference for Asia Pacific

ECONOMYNEXT – The UN Food and Agriculture Organisation’s 37th Session of the Regional Conference for Asia and the Pacific (#APRC37) will be held in Colombo, Sri Lanka, from February 19 to 22, the FAO said.

Civil society organisations (CSOs) from Asia and the Pacific are expected to take part in this major multilateral conference aimed at charting a course for the region’s food security and agrifood systems transformation, the FAO, a United Nations (UN) agency, said in a statement.

The CSOs’ participation at the event will “aim to add a collective voice among civil society organisations during their contributions to discussions at the conference – a biennial governing body session of some 46 FAO member nations from across the region. The CSO’s finalised their positions, in advance of #APRC37, during a virtual consultation this week,” the FAO said.

In parallel to the CSO meetings, an online consultation amongst private sector entities is ongoing, and representatives from the private sector will also have an opportunity to provide contributions to the FAO’s regional governing body session.

Organised by the FAO Regional Office for Asia and the Pacific, the #APRC37 will convene, in-person, in Colombo, Sri Lanka, the host country, February 19-22, with high-level representation of government ministers and leaders from across the vast region. According to the FAO, the purpose of the event is to review proposals and decide upon a course of action to transform the region’s agrifood systems, making them more fit-for-purpose and to ensure food security for billions of the region’s inhabitants. FAO Director-General QU Dongyu will also be in attendance at the high-level ministerial session.

The CSO consultation process in the Asia-Pacific region, an opportunity for CSOs to make interventions at FAO’s regional conferences, the organisation said, has evolved since 2010, with broad-based support from the region’s civil society communities and FAO. Following on from that success, it said, private sector consultations were also considered very successful during the last APRCs.

“From the experience gained together, I am convinced that with taking due consideration of the views of various stakeholders, such as civil society  and private sector, FAO’s members and their policymakers may better define the actions they need to achieve the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) by 2030, particularly those related to ending hunger and poverty,”FAO Assistant Director-General and Regional Representative for Asia and the Pacific Jong-Jin Kim was quoted as saying during his opening remarks to the CSO meeting.

The regional CSO meeting, supported by FAO and organised virtually by host CSOs in Sri Lanka, was attended by 100 participants from across the Asia-Pacific region, representing various constituencies including small-scale producers, fishers, pastoralists, indigenous peoples and landless organisations, rural and agricultural workers, women and youth organisations and NGOs, the statement said. (Colombo/Jan26/2024)