Hubris and downfall

The SJB-led Opposition made a public display of collecting signatures for a no-confidence motion (NCM) against Prime Minister and Education Minister Dr. Harini Amarasuriya over the government’s flawed educational reforms, but it has since got cold feet. Not all Opposition parties have endorsed the NCM in question. Some bigwigs of the JVP/NPP government with a two-thirds majority are now daring the Opposition to go ahead with the NCM. Dr. Amarasuriya herself has taunted the Opposition, in Parliament, asking why it has baulked at moving the NCM against her.

The government is humiliating trade unions as well. Deputy Health Minister Dr. Hansaka Wijemuni has scoffed at the strength of the Government Medical Officers Association, which is currently on the warpath. He has claimed that the doctors did their utmost to win their demands by holding patients to ransom, but in vain, and warned that the government will not hesitate to take stern action to keep the state-run hospitals free from disruptions. This warning smacks of a veiled threat.

The JVP/NPP high-ups are sounding just like their predecessors, especially the members of the UNP regime led by President J. R. Jayewardene. The incumbent government’s dire warning to the protesting doctors reminds us of how the JRJ government suppressed trade union struggles in the 1980s. Having crushed the July 1980 general strike by terminating tens of thousands of workers who took part in it, the Jayewardene government bragged that ‘the elephant’ (meaning the UNP) had only shaken its trunk.

As for the Opposition’s NCM on hold, it is hoped that the JVP/NPP government will not follow a very bad precedent set by the Jayewardene regime. In 1980, the Opposition sought to postpone the debate on an NCM it moved against the then Speaker Bakeer Markar for backing President Jayewardene’s efforts to retain Abeyratne Pilapitiya as a UNP MP by nominating him to the Kalawana electorate despite a Supreme Court ruling that his election was void. Speaker Markar echoed President Jayewardene’s assertion that the Kalawana seat had not fallen vacant, and therefore a by-election was not warranted. The NCM against the Speaker was scheduled to be debated on 23 December, 1980, but the Opposition wanted it postponed in view of possible legal implications of the by-election the UNP was trying to avoid. But claiming that the NCM, moved by the Opposition, was of utmost national importance and therefore had to be debated urgently, the UNP government took it up, put it to the vote and defeated it! All UNP MPs, including the proposer and the seconder, voted against the NCM! The Opposition boycotted the NCM debate.

When the JVP-NPP government dares the Opposition to move the NCM against Prime Minister Amarasuriya, it sounds like its immediate predecessor, the SLPP-UNP administration, which was led by Jayewardene’s nephew, President Ranil Wickremesinghe. One may recall that when the Opposition, including the JVP, demanded action against the then Health Minister Keheliya Rambukwella over a racket involving the procurement of a fake cancer drug, President Wickremesinghe audaciously challenged it to move an NCM against Rambukwella. The Opposition did so, but the SLPP and the UNP defeated the NCM comfortably. Wickremesinghe apparently thought the matter would end there, but he was mistaken.

A government may defeat an NCM and boast of victory, but allegations against its members do not go away. The SLPP-UNP government could not go on defending Rambukwella, who was eventually thrown to the wolves. A parliamentary majority does not necessarily translate into a government’s ability to win elections. The crumbling SLPP-UNP regime, which defeated the NCM against Rambukwella, faced ignominious defeats in the presidential and parliamentary elections in 2024. The Yahapalana government (2015-2019) also had a parliamentary majority despite the UPFA’s pull-out from it in October 2018; the then Prime Minister Ranil Wickremesinghe retained his hold on power with the help of the JVP, the TNA, etc., but his party, the UNP, was reduced to a single National List seat in the 2020 general election. The JVP, which threw its weight behind Wickremesinghe, could secure only three seats.

Governments with supermajorities, too, have suffered crushing electoral defeats in Sri Lanka. The SLFP-led United Front government, which had a two-thirds majority, suffered a Humpty Dumpty-like fall in 1977. President Mahinda Rajapaksa’s government secured a two-thirds majority but collapsed like a house of cards in 2015. So did the Gotabaya Rajapaksa administration, which also had a two-thirds majority. The JVP-NPP government is ruining things for itself so much so that it is wary of holding the Provincial Council elections. Powerful governments in this country apparently tend to dig their own political graves.

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.