Ports Ministry rejects claims linking AASL Chairman’s removal to Mahabodhi Thero letter

The Ports and Civil Aviation Ministry yesterday categorically rejected claims circulating in sections of the media that the removal of Airports and Civil Aviation Corporation (AASL) former Chairman Rhasa Abeywickrama, was linked to a letter sent by Ven. Banagala Upatissa Thero seeking an extension of a special permit to enter the airport terminal.

In a clarification statement, the Ministry noted a “false opinion” was being propagated suggesting that the former Chairman’s removal was based on a request made by the President of the Sri Lanka Mahabodhi Society. The Ministry stressed that the two matters were entirely unrelated.

According to the Ministry, Ven. Banagala Upatissa Thero, in a letter dated 29 December 2025 addressed to the “Ports and Civil Aviation Ministry on the official letterhead of the Sri Lanka Mahabodhi Society, requested an extension of a special permit previously granted to him to enter the airport terminal. The permit was due to expire on 31 December 2025.

The Minister, taking into consideration the Venerable Thero’s international religious engagements, noted on the same letter that the special permission should be extended beyond 31 December 2025 into the following year. This recommendation was then forwarded to the former Chairman, Rhasa Abeywickrama, for further action.

The Ministry explained that the Minister had also instructed that any permission be issued subject to appropriate conditions, taking into account information provided by the former Chairman regarding experiences in earlier instances involving the issuance of special permits. Acting in line with these instructions, the former Chairman sent a letter to Ven. Banagala Upatissa Thero on 9 January 2026.

The statement noted that the relevant letter was issued in the first week of January at the request of the Venerable Thero and that there was no disagreement or conflict of opinion between the Minister and the former Chairman on this matter.

Addressing the leadership change at AASL, the Ministry said that, amid several changes to the administrative structure of the Airports and Airlines Company and the need to address other institutional matters, a decision had to be taken regarding the position of Chairman. Following a discussion with the former Chairman on 21 January 2026, the Minister took steps to remove Rhasa Abeywickrama from the post.

“I would like to clarify that the letter sent to Venerable Banagala Upatissa Thero has no connection whatsoever to the removal of the former Chairman from his position,” the Ministry stated.

Separately, the statement noted that AASL Chairman Harsha Abeywickrema has since issued a letter informing Ven. Banagala Upatissa Thero that, should he require access to Bandaranaike International Airport (BIA) premises in the future, he should make requests via the official designated telephone numbers, so that any special arrangements can be made as necessary.