Variety is the spice of life…

I would say this figure of speech applies very much to food, especially when there is something new and exciting for you to check out!

In this regard, the Mount Lavinia Hotel has moved into top gear and is offering the gourmet public variety, and more variety.

The hotel’s third consecutive Slow Food event for the year 2024 will take place tomorrow, Friday, March 22nd, at the Horizon Rooftop, with native Chef Mats Petersson in action, spotlighting Swedish culinary delicacies, and flavours, from different regions of Sweden.

The sit-down family-style dinner, I’m told, will consist of Swedish Meatballs, Kalops (Swedish Beef Stew), Barramundi, Kroppkaka Dumplings and many more savouries, with desserts like Prinsesstårta and Apple Crust.

The concept of Slow Food has always been highly valued at Mount Lavinia Hotel, considering the hotel’s commitment to sustainability and supporting local growers, fishers, and producers.

According to Anura Dewapura, the Chief Operating Officer, Slow Food is not just about savouring a meal; it’s a movement that celebrates local traditions, sustainability, and the pleasure of sharing a good, hearty meal that is prepared with locally grown, fresh ingredients.

Says Anura: “Our commitment to sustainability extends beyond hosting Slow Food events. Slow Food Sweden is a part of the hotel’s ongoing sustainability project. In January, we launched the first ever Vegan Market; MLH Plant-Earth Market, coinciding with the Poya Vegan Lunch Buffet and Vegan High Tea.”

Slow Food Sweden tomorrow will not only celebrate the culinary excellence and the cultural exchange but it will also value the concept of Slow Food movement by educating the gathering.

24-year-old collective agreement had to be honoured and precedents followed: CBSL Governor

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.