HNB Assurance Celebrates First Anniversary of Empowering Women with In.She

HNB Assurance PLC proudly celebrated the first anniversary of its groundbreaking women empowerment program, In.she. This initiative, designed to uplift and support women within both the insurance industry and the company, aims to foster gender equality and diversity.

Launched on March 8th, 2023, in celebration of International Women’s Day, In.she has exemplified HNB Assurance’s commitment to creating an inclusive workplace and empowering women to excel in their careers. The program’s first-year celebration, held at the Royal MAS Arena, set the stage for a continued journey of empowerment and growth.

In recognition of its efforts, HNB Assurance was recognized as one of the female-friendly workplaces to work in 2023, a testament to the company’s support for women’s advancement and well-being.

The first anniversary celebration, themed “Glamor Galore,” showcased a fashion show featuring designs and models from within the company’s talented staff. Additionally, a panel discussion was hosted during the event, featuring esteemed personalities such as Yureni Noshika, Chathurika Peries, Ruchira Karunarathne and Dilini Jayasuriya.

Lasitha Wimalaratne, CEO of HNBA, sharing his thoughts at the first year anniversary of In.She, stated, ” At HNB Assurance, we are committed to creating an inclusive workplace where every individual, irrespective of gender, has the opportunity to excel. However, we must acknowledge that there are specific challenges that disproportionately impact women due to social and cultural factors, a key feature of our In.She program is to address and overcome these obstacles by providing support and resources required.”

Navin Rupasinghe, Head of Human Resources / Assistant General Manager of HNBA, added, “Our journey with In.She has been incredibly rewarding and we are thrilled to celebrate its first anniversary. Through this program, we have witnessed the remarkable potential of our female workforce. I’d like to take this opportunity to congratulate the In.She team for their efforts and passion in driving this initiative, let me also remind and emphasize that the management stands firmly behind this endeavor, offering complete support to ensure its continued success.”

HNB Assurance PLC (HNBA) is one of the fastest growing Insurance Companies in Sri Lanka with a network of 69 branches. HNBA is a Life Insurance company with a rating of ‘A-’ (lka) by Fitch Ratings Lanka for ‘National Insurer Financial Strength Rating’. Following the introduction of the segregation rules by the Insurance Regulator, HNB General Insurance Limited (HNBGI) was created and commenced its operations in January 2015; HNBGI continues to specialize in motor, non-motor and Takaful insurance solutions and is a fully owned subsidiary of HNB Assurance PLC.

HNB General Insurance has been assigned a ‘National Insurer Financial Strength Rating’ of ‘A-’ (lka) by Fitch Ratings Lanka Limited. HNBA is rated within the Top 100 brands and Top 100 companies in Sri Lanka by LMD and HNB Assurance has won international awards for Brand Excellence, Digital Marketing and HR Excellence including the Great Place To Work® Certification, and won many awards for its Annual Reports at award ceremonies organized by the Institute of Chartered Accountants of Sri Lanka.

IMF reaches staff-level agreement on Second Review of Sri Lanka’s EFF

HNB Assurance celebrates record-breaking 203 MDRT Qualifiers, including 20 COTs and 05 TOTs

HNB Assurance Advisor Distribution Management Team Celebrates its Exceptional Performance

HNB Assurance advisor distribution management team celebrates its exceptional performance

HNB Assurance’s winning streak continues at SLIM National Sales Awards

HNB Assurance Celebrates Achievements and Talent at Annual Staff Conference

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.