HNB General Insurance strengthens board

HNB General Insurance Ltd (HNBGI) has announced the strategic appointments of Lakshman Silva as Non-Executive/Nominee Director and Sandra De Zoysa as Independent/Non-Executive Director to its board of directors.

These high-profile appointments mark a significant milestone for the insurer as it actively scales its digital platforms and redefines its customer service architecture to achieve its long-term corporate vision.

Bringing together an exceptional blend of multi-industry operational experience and deep financial sector expertise, the new directors are poised to provide vital strategic oversight.

Silva’s profound banking acumen, extensive experience in corporate governance and expertise in macroeconomic stakeholder management are set to elevate the company’s financial strategy and regulatory framework.

Simultaneously, De Zoysa’s pioneering background in customer experience (CX) and digital transformation leadership will serve as a critical catalyst for driving future-ready disruption across HNBGI’s service channels.

Silva brings over three decades of financial governance and leadership expertise, following a distinguished career within DFCC Banking Group. He served as CEO of DFCC Vardhana Bank in 2010, later became Deputy CEO of DFCC Bank PLC and ultimately served as its CEO from 2017 until 2021.

Throughout his career, Silva held several key governance roles, including serving as Chairman of key DFCC subsidiaries, namely DFCC Consulting (Pvt.) Limited, Lanka Industrial Estates Limited and Synapsys Limited. He also served as Chairman of the Sri Lanka Banks’ Association and Acuity Partners (Pvt.) Ltd.

Currently, he is Chairman of LankaPay and Panasian Power PLC, serves as an Independent Director on the boards of Seylan Bank PLC, Melstercorp PLC, Distilleries Lanka PLC and HNB Life PLC as well as a member of the Stakeholder Engagement Committee of the Central Bank of Sri Lanka.

A Past President of the Association of Professional Bankers, Silva holds a BCom (Sp.) from the University of Kelaniya and an MBA from the University of Sri Jayewardenepura.

De Zoysa is a globally recognised leader in customer experience (CX) and organisational transformation, with over three decades of experience in the ICT industry.

As the founder of CEx Consulting, she advises organisations on digital and CX strategy. During her 28-year tenure at Dialog Axiata PLC, she served as Group Chief Customer Officer, Managing Director of Dialog Business Services and Chair of Axiata Berhad’s Digital CX Expert Working Group.

She is the first executive in the Asia-Pacific region to hold a dedicated C-suite CX role. A founding Charter member of TiE Colombo and founding member and first Chairperson of SLASSCOM, De Zoysa continues to contribute to regional and global thought leadership as a member of the Customer Experience Professionals Association (CXPA) Asia Regional Leadership Council and Chairs the Sri Lanka Institute of Directors- Women Directors Forum.

She is a Fellow of the British Computer Society (FBCS). She holds a Master’s in Digital Transformation Leadership, an Executive MBA, a Master’s in Human Resource Management and is a Certified Scrum Master and Lean Six Sigma Black Belt; she is also the only Certified CX Professional (CCXP) and Training Provider for CXPA in Sri Lanka.