Speaker urged not to endorse Online Safety Bill without verifying full adherence to SC directives

Media and civil society groups have urged Speaker of Parliament Mahinda Yapa Abeywardena not to endorse the recently passed controversial Online Safety Bill without verifying whether the Supreme Court’s directives are fully adhered to.

In a letter jointly addressed to the Speaker, the Media, Civil Society and Trade Union Collective to Rise against Oppressive Laws noted that the proposed legislation which ‘completely endangers the freedom of expression’ should be rejected outright.

Expressing its strong objections to the ‘hasty passage’ of the Bill on January 24 in the parliament, sans discussion with any stakeholder, and ignoring the directives of the Supreme Court.

“MPs of the opposition parties have pointed out that the Bill was debated and passed in the parliament without proper inclusion of amendments and guidelines directed by the Supreme Court. Those amendments and guidelines were issued by the Supreme Court after taking into consideration a record of 45 fundamental rights petitions challenging the draft Bill.

“We believe, that if what the opposition MPs point out had occurred during the passage of the Bill, it clearly violates the Constitution, undermines the sovereignty of the people and has possibly caused contempt of court as well.”

Media and civil society groups vowed not to stop their fight against regulations that are stifling the right to freedom of expression, despite the Bill being as an Act by the Parliament. “This letter is also out commitment to continue our fight against regulations that are going to be implemented despite our objections that not only impede our right to free expression but also cause possible harm to the economy.”

They said it was clear that the government is attempting to make the Online Safety Bill into law urgently to counter the opposition against the government ahead of the upcoming elections.

Noting that it is the Speaker’s responsibility to ensure that parliamentary orders are followed, they urged him to guarantee that the Supreme Court-directed amendments are incorporated into the Online Safety Bill before putting his sign on it.

“Therefore, we as citizen activists and citizens who respect democracy, request you not to sigh your consent to the Bill until you are satisfied that the orders and guidelines sent to you by the Supreme Court are fully incorporated into the Bill.”