Rivers, Rights, Resilience Forum 2026 begins in Colombo

Oxfam in Asia commenced the Rivers, Rights, Resilience Forum (RRRF) 2026, a three-day regional forum bringing together water experts, policymakers, civil society, researchers, and community leaders from across South Asia and beyond to strengthen cooperation on shared river systems and climate resilience.

The Forum is part of the Transboundary Rivers of South Asia (TROSA) programme, supported by the Government of Sweden, which works on the Ganges–Brahmaputra–Meghna (GBM) river basins, while also encouraging cross-basin learning at the regional and global levels. This year’s theme is “Building Resilient Communities and Ecosystems.” The Forum is co-organised by Oxfam in Asia and Dev Pro, Sri Lanka.

The forum opened with a welcome address by John Samuel, Regional Director, Oxfam in Asia, who highlighted the deep connection between rivers, politics, climate change, and sustainability. He underlined how rivers shape both environmental and social outcomes across South Asia and called for stronger collaboration between governments and civil society.

“Today building resilience is important in terms of climate and politics, and when civic space is shrinking, we should all work in solidarity,” he said.

Speaking at the Forum, Chamindry Saparamadu, Executive Director of DevPro shared examples of how communities in Sri Lanka have taken actions to ensure equitable access to water resources through catchment protection initiatives, community-based water societies etc. She further highlighted that learning exchanges would be useful to further strengthen inter-provincial water governance in Sri Lanka.

The Chief Guest, Syeda Rizwana Hasan, Advisor, Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change and Ministry of Water Resources, Bangladesh, in her video message, emphasised the need for regional cooperation among South Asian countries beyond the upstream–downstream identity.

“Climate change will make water scarce, so South Asian countries have to come together to work on the common interest of their communities. Rivers are not just ecology but economics as well for communities. Forums like this help us to share our experience and learn from each other,” she said.

First Capital to unveil Sri Lanka’s Economic Outlook and Investment Strategies for 2026

Siyapatha Finance welcomes the New Year with renewed hope and resilience

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.