EFC appoints Yashoravi Bakmiwewa as Director General

The Employers’ Federation of Ceylon (EFC), Sri Lanka’s premier employers’ organisation, has appointed Yashoravi Bakmiwewa as its 14th Director General, marking a historic milestone in the Federation’s 97-year history. She is the first female to serve as Director General of the EFC and also the first female Director General to head an Employers’ Business Member Organisation (EBMO) in South Asia. The appointment heralds a significant era for leadership within the region’s employer representative bodies.

Bakmiwewa succeeds Vajira Ellepola, under whose leadership the Federation further strengthened its position as the country’s leading voice for employers. Her appointment is a further reflection of the Federation’s commitment to continuity, professional excellence, and inclusive leadership as it continues to support employers in navigating the evolving world of work.

An Attorney-at-Law with over 16 years of distinguished service at the EFC, Bakmiwewa, is a graduate of the University of Colombo with a Bachelor of Laws (LL.B.) and a Masters in Labour Relations and Human Resources Management. She was admitted as an Attorney-at-Law of the Supreme Court of Sri Lanka in 2007 and commenced her legal career at the Attorney General’s Department before joining the EFC in 2010.

Since joining the EFC, Bakmiwewa has been instrumental in providing strategic legal and industrial relations advisory services to member organisations representing diverse industries. In 2019, Bakmiwewa was appointed as the Head of the EFC’s training division and under her leadership and guidance, the EFC training division reached several important milestones which was instrumental in strengthening workplace compliance and productive employment relations. Apart from representing members before legal forums, throughout her tenure, Bakmiwewa has contributed significantly to national policy discussions by representing employer interests at key tripartite forums, including Wages Boards and national steering committees.

Following her appointment as the Director General, Bakmiwewa noted that amidst ever evolving socio-economic challenges the world of business has to brave, the EFC is well positioned to navigate them with confidence and excellence. “Our history is one of resilience, having successfully weathered many periods of uncertainty and transformation during its nearly century-long journey. Drawing on that legacy, we are confident that we will continue to adapt, innovate and extend support for private sector businesses to thrive in an increasingly complex and dynamic business environment”

Bakmiwewa also remarks that, in the present AI-driven business environment, the Federation is conscious of adapting to support business transformation while being mindful of the unprecedented environmental and sustainability challenges that are reshaping businesses and economies worldwide.

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.