Wickremesinghe launches ‘Sri Lanka Can’ campaign for presidency; forms broader alliance

ECONOMYNEXT – President Ranil Wickremesinghe on Friday (16) formed a broader independent coalition with 34 political leaders from different parties and launched his presidential campaign under the theme ‘Sri Lanka Can’ (Puluvan Sri Lanka).

Backed by more than 100 legislators in the 225-member parliament, Wickremesinghe is credited for implementing International Monetary Fund (IMF)-backed hard reforms.

“Don’t focus on the future of politicians; think about your own future and vote in this presidential election,” Wickremesinghe told the gathering after launching his campaign with a range of political parties including center-right to center-left and nationalists to leftists.

Most legislators who signed the agreement with Wickremesinghe had been working with him in the past two years after he was elected as the president following an unprecedented economic crisis.

“This agreement was signed by a group of people who chose action over mere words, standing their ground and committing to change.”

Wickremesinghe, 75, is contesting in the island nation’s presidential poll for the third time.

His first attempt in 1999 ended in a defeat after people voted for his rival Chandrika Bandaranaike Kumaratunga who escaped from an assassination attempt by Tamil Tiger rebels.

He lost the second attempt in 2005 when the Tamil Tiger rebels forced a voting boycott in the island nation’s North and East amid allegation that his rival Mahinda Rajapaksa funded the rebels for boycott.

“Sri Lanka Can. We have gathered here to sign to show what Sri Lanka Can do. This is about the country’s future,” he said.

“Instead of saying can’t, let’s say Sri Lanka Can,” Wickremesinghe said.

“When I took over, there were no political parties. The group (backed me) said we can and that is why we are here now.”

“This presidency is about securing the country’s future. Unlike other candidates, I will not say vote for me. I would request you to vote, thinking about your future.”

Under Wickremesinghe’s IMF-backed economic reforms, Sri Lanka managed to slow down inflation and stabilize the rupee currency amid wide criticism over higher taxes and lower disposable income.

“When I took over the country, there was no party standing behind me. However, the Prime Minister, ministers, and a group of parliament members joined me, believing that the country could be rebuilt. It was because of this belief and determination that we are now able to hold a presidential election,” he said.

“We took over a nation with a collapsed economy and have since managed to control inflation and increase foreign reserves. This progress was achieved in partnership with the people.” (Colombo/August 16/2024)