Uber introduces Hybrid Subscriptions for Moto and Tuk Drivers

Uber, Sri Lanka’s most loved ridesharing platform, today announced the launch of Hybrid Subscriptions for Moto and Tuk drivers in the country. This includes a new ‘earn first, pay later’ model that gives drivers greater flexibility by allowing them to start earning on the platform without upfront payments. Drivers will continue to benefit from 0% commission on trips, allowing them to keep all of their earnings while paying a subscription fee separately.

With hybrid subscriptions, drivers can choose a model that works best for their driving patterns, making it easier for both full-time and part-time drivers to access trips and earn on Uber. The launch is aimed at improving the overall experience for drivers while continuing to offer reliable mobility for riders.

Flexibility and earning potential remain key priorities for drivers across Sri Lanka’s two- and three-wheeler ecosystem. The new model addresses this by giving drivers more control over how they engage with the platform and how they structure their earnings. By offering both time-based and earning-based subscription options, Uber provides drivers greater flexibility. While time-based subscriptions are ideal for full-time drivers, earning-based subscriptions work well for part-time drivers.

Commenting on the launch, Kaushalya Gunaratne, Country Manager – Mobility, Uber Sri Lanka, said, “”Drivers are at the heart of everything we do. We were among the first to introduce subscription models for Moto and Tuk drivers in Sri Lanka, and with hybrid subscriptions, we’re taking it further – giving drivers the benefits of zero commissions and the flexibility to choose what works best for them.”

Sri Lanka’s capital market gains international recognition for GSS+ Bond issuances

Ideal Motors host ‘Ideal Abiyogaya 10’ in Habarana rewarding customer trust

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.