China becomes top foreign trainer for Sri Lanka’s public sector

ECONOMYNEXT – China has given the maximum number of training opportunities for Sri Lanka’s public sector employees across key sectors,the island nation’s Finance Secretary Mahinda Siriwardana said.

He said in his address at the first China Aid Training Alumni Reception held on Wednesday (30) showcasing the human resources cooperation between the two countries.

“China is the government that offers maximum number of training opportunities to Sri Lanka,” Siriwardana said at the event organized by the Chinese Embassy in Sri Lanka.

“We have noted that, since its initiation, China has provided more than 8,000 training opportunities in various fields such as health, education, industry, and construction for public sector officials in Sri Lanka. It is impressive that Sri Lanka now receives nearly 1,000 training programs each year from the Chinese government.

”Since the end of a 26-year conflict in 2009, China has increased its aid to Sri Lanka in human development.

China became Sri Lanka’s top borrower during former president Mahinda Rajapaksa’s era amid granting training opportunities to many government employees who were directly involved with the projects Beijing funded, government officials have said.

After the economic crisis in 2022, India also has been offering many training opportunities for employees in many sectors including judiciary, media, and police.

Qi Zhenhong, Chinese Ambassador to SriLanka said China’s foreign aid training adheres to the concept of sharing, consultation and co-construction, builds a platform for countries to exchange experience in governance, and fully shares the successful experience of Chinese modernization.

He said China has used foreign aid funds to hold various training programs in China, inviting nearly 13,000 Sri Lankan friends of various circles to participate in seminars in China over the years.

By the end of October this year, more than 1,000 Sri Lankan participants went to China for training, and the training topics covered 17 major areas including public management, scientific research,information technology, economy and trade, education, health, agriculture, forestry, animal husbandry and fishery, resources and environment, and disaster management, Qi said.

“The Chinese government will continue to deepen human resources cooperation with developing countries, to stay committed to encouraging the development and revitalization of the “Global South”, injecting robust impetus into global progress.”

“In the new year, the Chinese government will fully consider the development needs of the new Sri Lankan government, improve the pertinence and effectiveness of training programs, and welcome more participants to visit and study in China.” (Colombo/October 31/2024)