CBB celebrates 25th anniversary with exclusive member networking session at Cinnamon Life

From left: Industry and Entrepreneurship Development Deputy Minister Chathuranga Abeysinghe, HSBC Sri Lanka Chief Executive Officer and CBB President Mark Surgenor, and SL-UK Chamber of Commerce Director and General Secretary Charles Rohan De Alwis

The Council for Business with Britain (CBB) of The Ceylon Chamber of Commerce recently celebrated its 25th anniversary in Sri Lanka. The 25th Annual General Meeting (AGM) was held at Westminster House, followed by an exclusive networking session for members at Cinnamon Life, bringing together leading business professionals and stakeholders from the UK-Sri Lanka bilateral business community.

HSBC Sri Lanka Chief Executive Officer Mark Surgenor was re-elected President of the Council, while Norfolk Foods Ltd., President Ameena Ziauddin and KPMG Sri Lanka Head of Deal Advisory Shiluka Goonewardene were re-elected Senior Vice President and Vice President, respectively. Fadhil Jiffry of London Stock Exchange Group Sri Lanka was elected Treasurer.

The CBB Committee for 2025/26 represents a strong cross-section of Sri Lanka’s corporate sector, including Aitken Spence Travels Ltd., De La Rue Lanka, Hayleys Advantis Ltd., Hilton Colombo Residences, John Keells Holdings PLC, MAS Holdings Ltd., Point to Point Consulting Ltd., Unilever Sri Lanka, We Are Team Rocket by Edmeades & Simpson Ltd., and Wilton Metal Box Company Ltd.

Several distinguished professionals were also invited to serve on the committee, strengthening collaboration between Sri Lankan and British business interests.

2025/26 Committee with Chief Guest, Chief Presidential Adviser on Digital Economy Dr. Hans Wijayasuriya (seated, centre)

Addressing the gathering, Chief Presidential Adviser on Digital Economy Dr. Hans Wijayasuriya shared valuable insights on trade, investment, and innovation opportunities from the Government’s National Digital Strategy. British High Commissioner Andrew Patrick highlighted the ongoing commitment to fostering UK-Sri Lanka business relations and especially how the UK will continue to open trade opportunities.

The key highlight was the networking event, featuring guest speakers Industry and Entrepreneurship Development Deputy Minister Chathuranga Abeysinghe, High Commissioner Patrick, UK High Commission of Sri Lanka Minister – Commercial Somasena Mahadiulwewa (who joined virtually), SL-UK Chamber of Commerce Director and General Secretary Charles Rohan de Alwis, and emerging business voices from CBB’s NextGen program, including Krystal Reid, who also contributed to the discussion.

The two sessions underscored the CBB’s commitment to promoting strong bilateral trade relations, fostering innovation, and creating collaborative opportunities for the UK-Sri Lanka business community.

Recently, the UK Government announced liberalised rules of origin under the Developing Countries Trading Scheme (DCTS) from 2026. The reforms will allow Sri Lankan apparel manufacturers in particular to enjoy tariff -free access to the UK market whilst sourcing up to 100% of inputs from any country worldwide.