HUTCH “Praja Sathkara” makes Poson pilgrimage possible

One of Sri Lanka’s leading mobile networks, HUTCH Sri Lanka recently conducted its HUTCH ‘Praja Sathkara’ programme in Anuradhapura and Mihintale, marking Poson Poya Day. Through this community service initiative, HUTCH Sri Lanka provided pilgrims visiting Anuradhapura and Mihintale for Poson religious observances with free transport services between the two holy sites.

With normal transport modes congested during the period, and private hired transport unaffordable to many still, HUTCH took steps to provide pilgrims with free transportation services from 20th – 23rd June 2024 with free special train services and free bus services organized by HUTCH.

Commenting on the initiative, Tharindu Wijerathne – General Manager, National Sales at HUTCH Sri Lanka said, “Poson Poya Day marks the arrival of Buddhism in Sri Lanka. Many hundreds of thousands make their way to Anuradhapura and Mihintale to commemorate this holy period. With such significance, this period is also a time to reflect on fundamental Buddhist values such as kindness, generosity, and easing others’ difficulties.

“As a result, we realized that HUTCH could contribute by making the pilgrimage experience easier and possible to more people in the country. We are incredibly humbled to have been able to provide this valuable service to thousands of pilgrims, under HUTCH Praja Sathkara.”

In addition to the free transportation services, HUTCH Sri Lanka also broadened the initiative installing helpful signages and directional boards to guide pilgrims smoothly to the key sites in the pilgrimage. Many devotees expressed their gratitude for this thoughtful initiative by HUTCH Sri Lanka which made a pilgrimage possible and convenient for many.

NHRC 2024: CIPM’s landmark event in Human Resource Management successfully concludes

CSLK in aggressive expansion into overseas markets; USD 500,000 worth factory in Chennai

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.