Model apartment for John Keells Properties’ latest residential project, ‘Viman’ – now ready for viewing

John Keells Properties proudly unveiled the model apartment for its latest residential project – ‘Viman’ – to the media on 24th January 2024, at the John Keells Properties Head Office at 186, Vauxhall Street, Colombo 02. The presentation to the media offered a detailed viewing and explanation of how Viman is poised to transform living spaces in the heart of Ja-Ela in line with the developer’s vision of ‘Creating New Worlds’ and curating spaces that redefine life’s experiences. John Keells Properties has earned a prestigious reputation in the real estate market for making a significant impact with innovative approaches to creating unique living spaces and exceptional experiences.

Speaking on the occasion, Nadeem Shums, Head of Sales & Marketing – John Keells Properties and Vice President – John Keells Group said, “We are delighted to showcase the Viman model apartment which is much more than just a home. Inspired by the principles of balance, nature, and modern convenience, Viman offers a thoughtfully designed collection of residences that embrace eco-consciousness, accessibility to multiple locations, and a nurturing sense of community. Prospective home buyers interested in owning an apartment at Viman can now visit the model apartment right here in Colombo and have all their queries answered by our professional team.”

Sprawling across 6 acres in the heart of Ja-Ela, Viman offers a harmonious blend of modern comforts with 418 apartments, and is designed to provide a secure, family-friendly environment with convenient access to Colombo city, while retaining the charm of a small-town setting. Located in the heart of Ja-Ela, residents can enjoy easy access to an array of conveniences including supermarkets, banks, schools, restaurants and hospitals. Furthermore, Viman offers the distinct advantage of proximity to Colombo via the Colombo Port access highway, facilitating exceptional connectivity between Ja-Ela and Colombo. This strategic location not only enhances convenience but also ensures efficient travel for residents and businesses alike.

SLT-MOBITEL mCash and Union Assurance join forces to redefine Life Insurance accessibility in Sri Lanka

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.