Chocoholics Café announces first international expansion with entry into Saudi Arabia

Chocoholics, Sri Lanka’s premium dessert café brand renowned for its Belgian chocolate creations, today announced its first international expansion with plans to open outlets in Saudi Arabia, marking the beginning of a broader global journey.

The announcement follows the visit of Prince Waleed bin Nasser Al Saud, Founder and Chairman of Bayt Altawabel and Mr. Rizni Faizer, CEO of New Concepts at Bayt Altawabel to Chocoholics’ Colombo outlets. His recognition of the brand underscores the growing interest in lifestyle and hospitality ventures that align with Saudi Arabia’s Vision 2030.

“Experiencing Chocoholics in Colombo gave me a strong sense of the brand’s potential to succeed in Saudi Arabia, where café culture continues to evolve in exciting ways,” said Prince Waleed bin Nasser Al Saud. “Their dedication to quality and innovation reflects the type of international partnerships that complement Vision 2030. This collaboration is about more than business, it is about introducing new experiences that enrich lifestyle, hospitality, and cultural exchange in the Kingdom and beyond.”

“Our journey has always been about passion, innovation, and delivering unforgettable experiences,” said Wazni Wazeer, Co-Founder and Director of Chocoholics. “Launching in Saudi Arabia is just the start. This partnership represents the foundation of Chocoholics’ global expansion, taking our culture of chocolate-inspired experiences to audiences worldwide.”

“Welcoming Prince Waleed was a meaningful milestone for us and a sign that Sri Lankan entrepreneurship can be recognised on a global scale,” added Fayaz Nizam, Co-Founder and Director of Chocoholics. “His support underscores our readiness to contribute to Saudi Arabia’s vibrant café culture while preparing to extend Chocoholics’ footprint across the Middle East and further afield.”

Since opening in Colombo seven years ago, Chocoholics has grown to four outlets across the city, becoming a beloved destination for café-goers who value the blend of authentic Belgian chocolate with innovative creations. With its expansion into Saudi Arabia, Chocoholics is setting the stage for a new wave of Sri Lankan born brands making their mark on the world.

Keells and Uber Eats partner to bring on-demand grocery delivery to Sri Lankan homes

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.