A prudent move

The step taken by Police and transport authorities to remove all public transport vehicles that are defective and malfunctioning off the roads is, indeed, a welcome development and one that would go a long way in reducing the number of road accidents and deaths caused by those. In fact, this should apply to all vehicles that ply on our roads.

Today, one often comes across rickety jalopies cluttering up the roads which pose a hindrance to other vehicles and road users in general. They also pose a danger to life and limb, since faulty mechanisms of such vehicles may lead them to behave erratically and go out of control. According to a news report, 24 out of 54 buses and vans transporting schoolchildren were prohibited from operating in the Chilaw area.

These vehicles, when placed under inspection, were found to have had faulty brakes, worn tires and signal systems, steering wheel defects and complications with spare parts and lights etc. The vehicles have been ordered to be repaired and brought back for inspection, within 10 days, according to Madampe Police Traffic Division OIC Nissanka Reginald.

Of the 54 buses and vans inspected only one vehicle was found to be in good order, the OIC said. How these vehicles were allowed to ply on our roads at all is baffling indeed. After all, a majority of these vehicles may have been stopped by Traffic Cops for routine checks or speeding, or other offences. Then, how or why did they fail to notice the unsuitability and un-roadworthiness of these vehicles?

Perhaps, the answer lies elsewhere. It is no secret that many of our top cops are owners of private buses and also other vehicles, and, therefore, naturally they receive a clean bill of health from the lesser minions on road patrol. If so, it is clearly a case of breach of the law by those entrusted with upholding the law. This aspect should be looked into by the Minister in charge of the Police.

The Government should also look into the possibility of giving the owners of these un-roadworthy contraptions a rebate on the purchase of a brand new vehicle – may be up to Rs.1-2 million. This is a common practice in many other countries.

The mounting rate of road accidents requires urgent solutions. While defective and un-roadworthy vehicles are definitely one of the causes for this, Driving Under the Influence (DUI) too has contributed in no small measure towards fatal road accidents. Hence, the competence and fitness levels of those who take the wheel too need to undergo scrutiny. This is because the owners of office and school vans do not pay much attention to the competence levels of their drivers. In many of the reported incidents these drivers were found to be drug addicts or alcoholics. The owners of vehicles could be exploiting this situation to hire these individuals at very low pay. Hence, not just the roadworthiness of vehicles, even the drivers should undergo thorough inspections to ascertain if they are fit and capable of taking the wheel.

Accidents are also caused due to fatigue and drudgery, brought about by long distance travel. In the latter instance, the weary drivers tend to fall asleep and do so at great peril to themselves and road-users. Hence, regulations should be brought making it compulsory for drivers on long distance journeys to rest in between and only resume the journey when they feel fit and fresh. This way, highway accidents could be brought down to a great extent and valuable lives saved.

Many of those who lose their lives in road accidents may well be breadwinners of their families and especially, fathers of school going children. What would be their plight and what would be their future? Hence, those causing fatal accidents as a result of DUI should be dealt with in the severest form. Nothing short of the death sentence would suffice in such instances where accidents are caused by negligent drunk driving. Presently, though, there is a tendency by those causing road accidents resulting in the deaths of pedestrians, opting to pay compensation to the families of victims as a means of escaping the law arm of the law.

A well-known national cricketer, while returning after a late night party, knocked down and fatally wounded a private bus conductor. True to form, he got away by paying a hefty compensation package to the family of the victim, which, as a national cricketer, he could well afford. This is the wrong way. If an offence is committed, whoever it may be, the full force of the law should take its course. The matter of compensation should be considered as a secondary issue. It is only then that the law in its true spirit will come into play. President Anura Kumara Dissanayake has repeatedly continued to lay great emphasis on the implementation and upholding of the rule of law. Hence, there can be no deviation from this course – personalities involved notwithstanding. The Police, for its part, should look holistically at traffic issues and implement viable solutions to reduce the number of accidents countrywide.