What’s the world coming to?

The Bar Association of Sri Lanka (BASL) has been urging President Anura Kumara Dissanayake to take action to fill four vacancies each in the Supreme Court (SC) and the Court of Appeal (SC), but in vain. It has renewed its call, in a letter to the President, who however remains impervious to public opinion and fervent calls for filling the judicial vacancies. The BASL has warned that the prolonged delay in filling them could undermine the administration of justice and public confidence in the Judiciary.

The BASL has further noted that it is still awaiting a response to its previous letter to President Dissanayake, objecting to a government proposal to amend the Constitution to increase the retirement ages of the SC and CA judges and warning that such a move could have implications for judicial independence. Is it that the President’s Office has chosen to remain silent on the BASL letter?

The first of the SC vacancies arose following the retirement of Justice Gamini Amarasekera on 20 June 2025, according to the BASL. The other vacancies occurred due to the retirement of Justices S. Thurairaja, Kumudini Wickramasinghe and Priyantha Fernando.

There are no signs of President Dissanayake initiating action to fill the vacancies in the SC and the CA any time soon. Neither he nor his government has been able to offer any plausible explanation either, and it is only natural that an ulterior motive is suspected.

The BASL has rightly reminded President Dissanayake of his constitutional responsibility in this regard. Quoting Article 107 (1) of the Constitution, it has said the President is duty bound to appoint the judges of the SC and the CA, and warned that the continuation of judicial vacancies at issue over a long time is inconsistent with the effective discharge of that vital constitutional function. It is being asked in some quarters whether the President’s failure to fulfil this constitutional responsibility amounts to a violation of the Constitution.

The SC and CA vacancies have impeded the career progression of members of the judiciary, the BASL has argued cogently, insisting that they have placed an additional heavy burden on the two courts, as both of them now have to function with 25% fewer judges than their constitutionally stipulated complements. This situation has severely impacted the administration of justice and the efficient disposal of matters coming before the SC and the CA, according to the BASL. This is a very serious situation, and it defies comprehension why President Dissanayake has chosen to remain silent.

What’s the world coming to when the Head of State of a country keeps 25% of positions each in the superior courts vacant and refuses to heed serious concerns and counsel of professional organisations of lawyers and individual legal experts?

There is no way President Dissanayake can justify his decision to keep judicial vacancies under discussion unfilled. His failure to fill them could give rise to the perception that he is doing so pending the eligibility of certain individuals, as the BASL and other professional organisations have argued. Such perceptions do matter as much as reality in this country, given the manner in which successive governments have interfered with the judiciary to further their political interests.

If President Dissanayake thinks he can wear down his critics and have his own way, where judicial vacancies and the questionable government move to raise the retirement ages of the SC and CA judges are concerned, he will be mistaken. Such obduracy stemming from the arrogance of power is counterproductive, for it compels the critics of the government to harden their position on the issue and erodes public confidence in both the government and the judiciary.

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.