War on drugs: Some concerns and queries

The progress of the ongoing anti-narcotics drive was reviewed at the second meeting of the steering council of the ‘Nation United’ campaign, at the Presidential Secretariat, on Tuesday, with President Anura Kumara Dissanayake presiding. The discussion was dominated by some council members’ concerns about an allegation that a part of the narcotics taken into custody ended up in the hands of drug dealers. The issue was raised by a former PNB (Police Narcotics Bureau) officer-turned-musician, Sangeeth Wijesuriya, who is an ardent supporter of the NPP. Their concerns are not unfounded. In 2020, the then Police Spokesperson SSP Jaliya Senaratne revealed that 18 PNB officers had been arrested for allegedly passing drugs in the PNB custody to drug dealers. Two Government Analyst’s Department employees who doubled as drug peddlers were also arrested in that year. This shows how compromised some of those tasked with battling the scourge of narcotics are.

Wijesuriya said that eight kilos of narcotics, taken into custody some years back, had ended up as kurakkan flour, of all things. The wealthy drug Mafia has spread its tentacles over vital state institutions, and some public officials are in its pay. This has made the task of ridding the country of narcotics even more difficult.

The focus of anti-narcotics operations conducted at sea is usually on the smuggling of dangerous drugs into this country. There is reason to believe that Sri Lanka has become a narcotics hub, and most of the drugs smuggled in go undetected. Experts argue that some of the drugs brought here are smuggled out to other countries. This dimension of the problem deserves more attention.

The national steering council, on Tuesday, decided to introduce laws to provide for the on-site destruction of narcotics taken into custody after being tested and certified as dangerous drugs. It said that was the way to solve the problem of narcotics kept in evidence storage being siphoned off. President Dissanayake directed the officials of the Justice Ministry present at the meeting to ensure that necessary draft laws would be ready by March 2026. This is a long-felt need, and one can only hope that the problem will be solved once and for all.

Supporting an argument put forth by Wijesuriya, the President said the Magistrates visited crime scenes and conducted investigations, and thereafter the bodies of the victims were released for funerals. Narcotics taken into custody could be disposed of in a similar manner, he argued. However, this analogy does not hold in all respects. Funerals for the victims of crimes are allowed on the condition that their bodies are buried so that they could be exhumed if necessary. Care must be taken to ensure that there will be no loopholes in the laws to be made to enable the on-site destruction of drugs. Even the Constitution of this country is not without flaws.

Praising the success of the ongoing anti-narcotics operations, Wijesuriya, who was in the vanguard of the NPP’s election campaigns, claimed that under previous governments only several kilos of narcotics had been taken into custody. However, anti-narcotics operations yielded large stocks of drugs in the past as well. The NPP politicians also claim that the drug busting operations had not been successful before last year’s regime change. Such propagandistic claims are an indictment of the PNB, the STF, the Navy, the Coast Guard, the Customs, etc., engaged in combating the drug menace, for their implication is that those institutions succumbed to political pressure and did not carry out their duties and functions properly in the past.

The steering council should have taken up the Opposition’s allegation that some of the 323 red-flagged freight containers released without Customs inspection from the Colombo Port, in January 2025, carried narcotics. The Opposition has also called upon the President to name the media institution which, he recently said in Parliament, was involved in the drug dealing. The steering council members should also have asked the President to take legal action against the media institution he has chosen to leave unnamed.

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.