‘ApiDenna’ with Gypsies Piyal and Shenal

Music lovers, who are familiar with the lyrics of the Gypsies hit song ‘Lunu Dehi’ will, obviously, remember the opening words “Api denna ek weela…” with the late Sunil Perera doing the needful.

Well, what Sunil said in song, decades ago, has now become a reality, with his brother Piyal Perera, and the Gypsies new find, Shenal Nishshanka, operating as ‘ApiDenna,’ under the management of Ravi De Silva, who is now handling quite a few known showbiz artistes…and sports personalities, as well.

Piyal was quick to add that both he and Shenal haven’t quit the Gypsies.

“The Gypsies have been around for 55 years and I’m their leader. I joined the band when I was just 15 years old.”

According to Piyal, ‘ApiDenna’ is a new venture which he and Shenal decided to try out, with the guidance of Ravi De Silva.

“It has turned out to be a huge success and we seem to be in great demand…at various events,” said Piyal.

He went on to say that as ‘ApiDenna,’ he and Shenal does guest spots, performing with the band in attendance.

Referring to Shenal, he said this guy has emerged as a star, literally overnight, and now has a huge following of fans, and is a big hit wherever he performs.

Shenal was introduced to Piyal by one of the members of the Gypsies when he decided to take a break.

He came in as a guitarist but quickly showed his potential as a vocalist and that’s exactly where he is right now…upfront, creating all the excitement with his vocals and stage presentation.

Shenal describes himself as a rocker who can sing baila, too.

He also says the late Sunil Parera is a legend and can never ever be replaced.

“I’m not there to replace him or be like him. I’m there to do my own thing.”

The Gypsies, in the meanwhile, will continue to do their thing to keep their fans happy.

Their overseas assignments, this year, will see them in action in England, Australia, the USA, Canada, and Bangladesh.

Since the Gypsies have a busy work schedule, this year, Piyal mentioned that they would celebrate their 55 years in showbiz next year. “We will call it 55+.”

The band is also working on a few originals to be released before the year is out, said Piyal.

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.