Women in Tech Sri Lanka announces new team, renews strategic partnership with Mark & Comm

Clockwise from top left: Women in Tech Sri Lanka Chapter Ambassador Sanali Kaushalya, Events Manager Tharangani Dissanayake, Partnerships Executive Priyanka Chandrakanthan, Mark & Comm MD Thanzyl Thajudeen, Partnerships Manager Shanika Madushani, and Marketing Manager Dinusha Geethanjali

Women in Tech, a global non-profit organisation promoting inclusion, diversity, and equity in STEAM with a mission to empower 5 million women by 2030, has announced its new team, and also renewed its partnership with Colombo-based PR agency Mark & Comm Ltd., extending its role as strategic communications partner for the Sri Lanka Chapter for a further two years.

Women in Tech Sri Lanka is now led by Chapter Ambassador Sanali Kaushalya; Events Manager Tharangani Dissanayake; Marketing Manager Dinusha Geethanjali; Partnerships Manager Shanika Madushani; and Executive Partnerships Priyanka Chandrakanthan. Strengthening its vision, the Chapter has also appointed an advisory council comprising renowned local experts to guide advocacy and strategy.

Women in Tech Sri Lanka Ambassador Sanali Kaushalya said: “We are delighted to extend our partnership with Mark & Comm. Their expertise in shaping impactful communications has been instrumental for us. With their continued support, and the guidance of our advisors, we are confident of amplifying our efforts to empower more women across Sri Lanka while connecting with the global Women in Tech movement.”

Mark and Comm Ltd. Managing Director Thanzyl Thajudeen, who was instrumental in establishing the Women in Tech Sri Lanka Chapter added: “Sri Lanka has immense potential in STEAM, particularly among women. We are humbled to continue this partnership and proud to have played a role in bringing the chapter to life. Together, we will keep advancing advocacy, mentoring, and capacity building while urging the reforms and infrastructure needed to make inclusion a reality.”

Mark and Comm Ltd. Director and Head of Advocacy and Reporting Chamanie Nanayakkara commented: “This extended partnership is about more than communications, it is about shaping narratives that inspire young girls, shift societal perceptions, and bridge education, industry, and policy. Our goal is to help turn ideas into action and ensure women’s voices in STEAM are not just heard, but championed.”