Sri Lanka Navy recruiting cadre to safeguard country’s Exclusive Economic Zone

ECONOMYNEXT – Sri Lanka is recruiting members for its naval force with advertisements calling for applications from cadet entry officers, direct entry artificers, artificers, sailors, and officers.

The government plans to strengthen the navy to safeguard the country’s Exclusive Economic Zone (EEZ) in the Indian Ocean, the island nation’s state defence minister said last month.

“We need to strengthen both navy and the air force. We are in a strategic position globally. Our EEZ is eight times larger than our country. So improving the strength of navy is also our objective,” Pramitha Bandara Tennakoon said.

It will reduce its army cadre by more than 50 percent, he said. Sri Lanka is in the process of reducing a bloated state sector which is estimated at around 1.5 million in a country with 22 million population.

Tri forces (army, navy, air force) and police account for nearly 30 percent of the total state sector employees. Sri Lanka had a large number of military personnel when it ended a 26-year civil war in 2009.

The government was improving the Navy’s capacity in handling foreign research ships, Foreign Minister Ali Sabry also said last month.

Sri Lanka’s exclusive economic zone has become a geopolitical hotspot with a cold war between China and Sri Lanka’s neighbour India.

The island also faces encroachment by Indian fishermen in its northern seas on a daily basis. This week the Navy lost a sailor in an operation to apprehend Indian fishermen.

Sri Lanka Navy operations include deep sea surveillance, fast attack craft operations, security of harbours, inshore patrol craft, special boat squadrons, and land operations involving amphibious craft.

The Navy plays a large part in disaster management operations in the island, especially during the prevailing flood conditions, and in diving and rescue missions.

Earlier this year the Navy appointed its first batch of lady officer cadets. (Colombo/Jun27/2024)