Sri Lanka explores including pharmaceuticals, machinery in Pakistan FTA: Envoy

ECONOMYNEXT – Sri Lanka is exploring the inclusion of pharmaceuticals and machinery in the Free Trade Agreement (FTA) with Pakistan, Sri Lankan High Commissioner to Pakistan, Admiral Ravindra Wijegunaratne said.

Experts view the move as a potential step for Sri Lanka to reduce the prices of the both goods.

Both South Asian nations began implementing the FTA in 2005, allowing each side to export up to $1 billion worth of goods to the other.

“The trade volume should be increased,” Wijegunaratne told EconomyNext from Islamabad.

“During the last 20 years, Pakistan has improved tremendously, specially in the pharmaceutical and machinery sectors. We have to include these through negotiations,” he said when asked if Sri Lanka considers expanding the FTA list with Pakistan.

The aims of the FTA were to strengthen economic relations between the two nations, increase trade in goods and services, and reduce or eliminate tariffs on a wide range of products.

However, trade has stagnated without reaching the expected $1 billion mark in the last 19 years, with Pakistan exports reached to around $400 million worth of goods while Sri Lanka has managed to export only $100 million worth of goods to Pakistan.

President Ranil Wickremesinghe has been looking to expand trade through FTAs with other countries to boost the island nation’s exports and help recover from an unprecedented economic crisis.

Despite the FTA, both countries have faced challenges related to non-tariff barriers such as regulatory standards and customs procedures, according to trade experts. The trade imbalance, with Pakistan exporting more to Sri Lanka, has also been a challenge, they say.

Sri Lanka has already signed FTAs with India, Pakistan, Singapore, and Thailand, though only the agreements with the two South Asian nations are currently operational.

The island nation is also in the process of negotiating FTAs with China, Vietnam, and Indonesia. (Colombo/June 4/2024)