When police cross the line

Former Navy Commander Admiral Nishantha Ulugetenna was granted bail by the Kurunegala High Court (HC) yesterday. He had been held on remand for more than two months over the disappearance of a man from Pothuhera and denied bail several times. The Kurunegala HC was reportedly critical of the manner in which the CID had arrested the former Navy Chief.

The Opposition has said the CID arrested Ulugetenna solely on the basis of a statement made by a former LTTE intelligence leader, and he is a victim of a political witch-hunt. The government has denied the allegation.

One should not be so naïve as to expect the police, especially the CID, to heed censure by the judiciary and mend their ways. The police have been so politicised that it remains uncertain whether judicial censure alone can deter them from bypassing due process in arresting and prosecuting suspects. They have been at the beck and call of governments for decades. Old habits are said to die hard. Not even the National Police Commission has been able to depoliticise the police.

The Opposition politicians who are protesting against politically-motivated arrests and prosecutions also have a history of abusing power to harass their political opponents in a similar manner. All previous governments used the police as the Gestapo to suppress democratic dissent and settle political scores, albeit to varying degrees. The police arrested many people at the behest of those regimes and arraigned them on charges in such a way that they would not get bail easily. Such cases fell through either due to lack of credible evidence, or regime changes.

Remand prisons are hellholes in this country, as is public knowledge, and staying there is as bad as incarceration. Many suspects are kept in them for months on end. There is hardly anything that the people who are made to languish in those places for political reasons can do. Hence the pressing need for the police to be made to act responsibly when making arrests and opposing bail applications.

The JVP-led NPP promised to usher in good governance, and it was expected that all bad practices that had led to a severe erosion of public faith in the legal process would be discontinued forthwith after last year’s regime change. But they remain intact. What is unfolding under the current dispensation looks like a replay of what we witnessed during the UNP-led Yahapalana government, which was backed by the JVP.

During the Yahapalana government, the arrests of Opposition politicians and their cronies were invariably preceded by planted questions or Dorothy Dixers, raised by the JVP MPs in Parliament, enabling the Ministers to demonise the persons to be arrested. We editorially commented on those pre-arranged questions and the nexus between the JVP and the UNP. Cases against almost all those suspects collapsed as they were filed in a hurry; the police were more eager to make arrests to please their political masters than to ensure the viability of the cases they were filing. Not that all suspects were innocent; they got away with their crimes mainly because they were not prosecuted properly. It was a supreme irony that former President Ranil Wickremesinghe, who was the Prime Minister in the Yahapalana government, was arrested and remanded under a JVP-led government.

No crimes must go unpunished. Some of the leading Opposition figures, championing democracy and condemning politically motivated arrests and prosecutions, must be brought to justice for the crimes they themselves committed while in power. But due process must be followed in dealing with them, with no room being left for questions to be raised about the integrity of investigations. Similarly, the law must apply equally to everyone and legal action should be taken against the members of the current administration responsible for various rackets involving rice imports, cargo containers released without Customs inspection, coal procurement, etc.

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.