HIP: the region’s Port of Choice for ship repairs and layups

There has been an exponential increase in the number of vessels arriving at Hambantota International Port (HIP) for repairs and layups this year, marking a significant boost in its operational growth. From January to August 2024, the port hosted 23 vessels for these services, a remarkable 53% increase compared to the 15 vessels during the same period in 2023. Two vessels arrived in August alone, while a 3rd which had a 7 month layup at the port concluded its repairs in the same month, an HIP news release said.

Charaka Rupasinghe, Deputy General Manager – Marine Services and Fleet Management at HIP, says, “This particular market in port services is highly competitive and we already have several operators with different expertise offering their services from Hambantota International Port.

“With our capacity to accommodate vessels of all sizes for afloat and underwater repairs and the numerous berths we have allocated for this business, sometimes for extended periods, we expect this segment of our services to expand further in the coming year.

“In the case of ship repairs, not only our marketing teams but ship agents and repair companies also promote HIP, as their preferred location for repair and layout services.  On our part, we provide them with the best facilities, state-of-the-art equipment and conditions on par with international standards to carry out their services uninterrupted.”

The release indicated shp repair work done at Hambantota this year.

Floating Production Storage and Offloading (FPSO) vessel “Svetah Venetia” which spent seven months at the port for an extensive layup, successfully concluded the operation and departed on August 21. The vessel underwent a turret pipeline installation done by Colombo Dockyard and received a blow thruster installation and related repairs carried out by Dolphine Marine.

The M.V. ‘Ram Commander’ was at HIP from August 3 – 22 for short-term repairs. Harbour Serve Pvt. Ltd performed essential deck work on the vessel, including the replacement of vents and stair treads.

The most recent arrival is the bulk carrier “Archon Gabriel,” which docked at HIP on August 26 for maintenance of its steering gear’s hydraulic system. Repairs were carried out by maritime transportation company, CIAP Limited, and the vessel departed HIP on September 3.

“HIP operates under strict protocols of health and safety.  We constantly monitor our standards which are aligned with CM Port’s global practices operating in 50 terminals across the world.  Therefore, any vessel berthing at HIP can be assured of services that are of international standards. Our management and staff know what is expected of them and are committed to serve round the clock.  The added advantage of the port is its location which is easily accessible to vessels plying the east-west shipping routes,” says Capt. Miyuru Gunasekara, General Manager, Hambantota International Port Services (HIPS).

“The current increase in vessel activity is a testament to HIP’s growing reputation as a key player in the ship repair and layup sector, reinforcing its role as a critical multipurpose hub in global maritime logistics,” the release concluded.

Dialog Crowns Top Digital Innovators at Grand Finale of Innovation Challenge

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.