Burlington English making positive impact on Sri Lanka

Burlington English, a global leader in English language learning and teaching, is making waves in Sri Lanka, following a successful expansion across India.With a mission to enhance the classroom environment and improve educational outcomes, the group’s Managing Director, Amit Baveja, is spearheading efforts to engage Sri Lankan educators with cutting-edge teaching practices and AI-integrated learning resources.

Baveja, who oversees the South Asia and Southeast Asia markets, expressed excitement about the company’s foray into Sri Lanka.

Speaking to The Island Financial Review he said: ‘After a remarkable journey in India, Sri Lanka is our natural next step. We are here to support educators and the education system by providing state-of-the-art English language learning resources.’ He highlighting the importance of quality education in a country where English proficiency is critical for economic and career growth.

In a recent engagement in Colombo, Burlington English conducted workshops for around 70 educators from 40 of the country’s leading schools. The group previously hosted successful sessions in Kandy and Kurunegala, both of which were well-received by school leaders. Baveja noted that many Sri Lankan educators are eager for advanced teaching techniques and professional development to better equip their classrooms.

Baveja added: ‘Educators are looking for support in implementing new teaching practices and tools that can be replicated at the school level. Our goal is to offer resources that not only enhance student learning but also empower teachers to thrive in their roles.’

Burlington English was launched in India in December 2021 and quickly expanded to over 1,500 schools in 300 cities across the country. The integration of AI into their products has been a key differentiator, making learning more interactive and personalized, informed sources said.

‘Our AI-powered tools help track students’ progress, improve pronunciation and enhance vocabulary, offering a personalized learning experience, Baveja explained.

Baveja further said: ‘In just the last 45 days, we have trained 45,000 educators across India, with plans to empower 100,000 more in the coming year, both in India and Sri Lanka. Their resources, which combine traditional learning with digital content, have been highly appreciated by schools and educators alike.

‘Sri Lanka presents a unique opportunity for Burlington English, given the country’s strong emphasis on English proficiency in key sectors, such as hospitality, tourism and insurance. With 60% of Sri Lanka’s economy relying on the service sector, English plays a vital role in career advancement and employability.

‘Sri Lankans understand the importance of English for career growth. With around 30,000 students taking the IELTS exam annually, our resources are already helping learners achieve their goals.’The group is also planning to engage with government bodies to align their efforts with Sri Lanka’s educational reforms and support the development of the country’s workforce.

Bourse’ s bullishness intensifies in the wake of IMF’s positive responses to SL’s tax proposals

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.