Uber Eats celebrates couriers with awards worth LKR 8 million

Uber Eats, Sri Lanka’s most loved food and grocery delivery platform, celebrated the contribution of couriers on its platform at the fourth edition of ‘Delivery Bonanza’. The company recognized 300 most-engaged couriers who provided a great platform experience to eaters through reliable and seamless deliveries. The couriers were recognised basis maximum deliveries with least cancellations, quality or safety-related issues.

As part of Delivery Bonanza 4.0, select couriers across Colombo, Kandy, Kurunegala, Negombo, Kaluthra, Galle, Beruwala, and Bandaragama were recognized for their consistent contribution to the Uber Eats platform with gifts worth LKR 8 million. Gifts ranged from different large home appliances to multi-store gift vouchers and rain-shield packs. Grand prizes for eleven of the most engaged couriers included an electric motorbike, electric scooters and e-cycles.

Speaking at the event, Varun Wijewardane, General Manager of Uber Eats Sri Lanka, said, “Delivery Bonanza 4.0 marks another year of recognizing the unwavering efforts and dedication of couriers on our platform. They are the driving force behind our wide delivery network, which has redefined food and grocery delivery, making Uber Eats a household name in Sri Lanka. We are committed to supporting our couriers and helping them achieve their life goals and value the pivotal role that they have played in our journey.”

Uber Eats Delivery Bonanza aims to empower couriers to get maximum value from the Uber Eats app. The Uber platform helps them find flexible work that fits their life and helps them achieve their financial goals. Last year, as part of a special edition Bonanza event, Uber Eats gave away e-bikes to 100 couriers, further highlighting the company’s commitment to supporting and inspiring couriers on its platform.

Sri Lanka’s tourism poised for remarkable growth as visa free travel enhances industry potential

CSE launches version3 of its Business Intelligence Dashboard – CSE Market IQ (MIQ)

Expanding horizons; Unilever’s uStore.lk enters into a partnership with Celeste Daily and Uber Eats to improve consumer convenience

Union Assurance Premier Club Awards Recognizes Exceptional Performers in Q2 2023

Coca-Cola Beverages Sri Lanka and Uber Eats Sri Lanka launch ‘Ride for Recycling’

Union Assurance Premier Club Awards gifts exceptional performers luxury motor cars

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.