New star on the horizon…

The world over, especially where entertainment is concerned, new faces are always welcome.

Take for instance Sabrina Carpenter, zooming up the international charts with her releases.

And then we have K-pop, with new faces making their presence felt worldwide.

It’s interesting to note that we have got some new talent, as well…new faces to light up our showbiz scene.

A week ago, I had the opportunity of having a chat with a new-comer, and her manager.

Sanali Lihansa Silva, who will operate in the music scene as Lyhanza, comes from a musical family where her father and brother are singers, as well.

Lyhanza’s voice is very impressive, and her stage presentation, too, is something to shout about.

When asked about her impressive voice, her manager Ravi De Silva responded…”self-made”.

Lyhanza came into the limelight when she participated in the Derana Dream Star X1 contest, held this year.

Although she wasn’t crowned the winner, many described her as refreshing new talent.

With Ravi de Silva in charge of her activities, Lyhanza’s goal is to hit the big time, in the scene here.

Her maiden effort is an original, a music video titled ‘Ridi Jalase’, and you could check it out on YouTube.

Her manager explained that Lyhanza is going to take on the local scene…doing it differently.

“I’ve noticed that the trend here is the baila. Wherever you go, be it a stage show, dance, social events, and even weddings, they all want the baila, and I’ve decided to give them what they want”, said Ravi.

Lyhanza will be tackling those classic bailas, made popular by the baila singers of the past, and she has already done a great version of the MS Fernando baila hit ‘Asoka Mal’.

However, in the near future, Lyhanza says she will also give music lovers a variety of those famous Western hits.

This exciting new find was also seen in action, live, at a recent event held at St. Joseph’s College, Colombo.

According to veteran singer Sohan Weerasinghe, the next big star in the Sri Lankan entertainment scene, in the next 12 months, will be Lyhanza.

“She’s got what it takes to hit the limelight – attitude, personality and stage presence”

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.