Experience vs. Inexperience

The Opposition has blamed the severity of recent floods that devastated many areas, such as Gampola, on the controversial appointment of some engineers loyal to the NPP government to oversee the Kotmale reservoir in place of senior, experienced engineering professionals who could have responded to emergencies swiftly. It has claimed that if the experienced officials had been allowed to operate the reservoir, they would have begun releasing water early to prevent flash floods, without waiting for the sluice gates to open automatically.

President Anura Kumara Dissanayake has been on a whirlwind tour of the cyclone-hit areas during the last several days. Obviously, his mission is not only to speed up the ongoing relief and rebuilding programmes but also to mitigate the adverse political fallout from the disaster. He however has his work cut out. The dash of the Leader of the Red Comrades across the country reminds us of the Red Queen’s remark to Alice: “It takes all the running you can do to stay in the same place.”

President Dissanayake would not have had to exert himself in this manner if his government had responded swiftly to the warnings of cyclonic winds and heavy rains, issued by local and foreign meteorological agencies, two weeks before the landfall of Cyclone Ditwah. It has now been revealed that as early as 13 November, the India Meteorological Department, which runs the Regional Specialised Meteorological Centre (RMSC) responsible for monitoring the oceans in this region and issuing warnings of cyclones, alerted Sri Lanka to the impending adverse weather. The Sri Lankan government should have convened the Disaster Management Council and directed all state institutions to be prepared to face the impending extreme weather events.

Ironically, India’s warning of adverse weather came on 13 November, when the JVP leaders including President Dissanayake commemorated their party’s leaders and rank and file, who had died in the name of a cause that the JVP has since relinquished—defeating ‘Indian expansionism’ and ending Indian interference with Sri Lanka’s internal affairs’.

The Opposition insists that the severity of the Ditwah disaster could not be minimised owing to the JVP-NPP’s inexperience in governance. This argument is not without some merit, but the key members of the Opposition themselves have a history of ignoring dire warnings; they were in the dysfunctional Yahapalana government led by the UNP (2015-2020), which failed to act on repeated warnings of a series of terror attacks. They and other ‘experienced’ politicians in the Opposition are responsible for the rise of a group of inexperienced politicians to power.

It is not only power that corrupts; political experience also does, as evident from the prevalence of corruption under the watch of the so-called experienced leaders, who left the public with no alternative but to throw in their lot with a bunch of self-proclaimed messiahs with little or no experience in governance.

‘Inexperienced’ politicians’ rapid ascent to power can be traced to the people’s desperation to see the back of President Mahinda Rajapaksa, whose rule had become a metaphor for corruption, nepotism, abuse of power and political violence. But the country had to pay a huge price for electing Maithripala Sirisena, a mediocre politician, as President in 2015. He neglected national security and undermined the National Security Council, so much so that actionable intelligence about the Easter Sunday terror attacks went unheeded in 2019. Thereafter, the country took a huge gamble by electing Gotabaya Rajapaksa as President. His lack of experience in governance almost left the economy and democracy dead. Thankfully, he resigned without plunging the country into a bloodbath, but his failure paved the way for the meteoric rise of a bunch of inexperienced politicians to power; they stand accused of having failed to mitigate the impact of the recent disaster and save lives.

The need of the hour is for the self-proclaimed experienced Opposition politicians and the inexperienced government leaders to sink their political differences and join forces to accomplish the uphill task of providing relief to the disaster victims and helping rebuild their lives. Political battles and investigations into alleged lapses and failures can wait.

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.