Emojot secures strategic investment from U.S. to accelerate growth

Emojot, a global leader in artificial intelligence (AI)-powered customer experience management, has announced a strategic leadership restructuring alongside securing a strategic investment from the United States (US).

Both of these initiatives are aimed at accelerating the company’s growth and innovation. Accordingly, Dr. Shahani Markus, a seasoned entrepreneur and technology executive, will assume the role of Chief Executive Officer (CEO) with immediate effect. With a wealth of experience and a deep understanding of customer experience management, she will lead Emojot into its next phase of growth. Andun Liyanagunawardana, a co-founder with a proven track record in engineering and customer success, has been appointed Chief Operating Officer (COO). He will oversee the day-to-day operations, and ensure that the company’s strategic objectives are efficiently executed. Sachintha Ponnamperuma, another co-founder with extensive experience in engineering and research, will now serve as the company’s Chief Technology Officer (CTO). He is tasked with leading the technology team, focusing on developing cutting-edge solutions and driving forward product innovation.

Key advantages of the restructuring and investment Emojot recently secured from the US include faster growth and innovation, improved customer experience, a strong leadership team, a focus on AI-driven solutions, and financial backing to expand operations and advance product development. “This leadership transition, combined with the recent investment, marks a significant milestone for Emojot.

With a strong leadership team in place and the financial backing to fuel our growth, we will be able to capitalize on new opportunities, deliver exceptional value to our customers, and solidify our position as a global leader in experience management.” said Dr. Marcus.

AMDT Festival of Creativity 2024 converges largest gathering of creative talent

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.