Making friends with former Swedish Prime Minister, 91, at a bus stop

My friend Priyanwada and I were driving along a street in the Tyreso municipality of Stockholm, Sweden, and she suddenly stopped her car recognizing a familiar figure at a bus stop and saying, “Ah, our former prime minister is at the bus stop.”

Ingvar Carlsson, a two-time prime minister of Sweden, was waiting for a bus to travel to Stockholm for a political event. He only drives to Stockholm when it is absolutely necessary. “People recognize me on the bus and train and talk to me. I like that,” he says.

Carlsson, who sat in the Swedish Parliament for all of 38 years, is a well-known political leader not only in Sweden but also in Europe.  Sweden, one of the world’s leading welfare states, is headed by King Carl Gustaf; it is the third largest country in the European Union with a territory totaling 450,295 square kilometers.

Carlsson served as the Deputy Prime Minister from 1982 to 1986, before becoming prime minister from 1986 to 1991 and 1994 to 1996. He was elected PM in a parliamentary election in 1986 after the assassination of then Prime Minister Olof Palme, polling 178 votes in favour and zero votes against. The Carlsson government’s economic policy, social vision, and ability to work with opposition parties have contributed greatly to Sweden’s rise as a developed country not only in Europe but also in the world, justifying the trust placed in him by the people and the parliament as well.

When the Carlsson government was formed in 1986, Sweden’s budget deficit was 90 billion kronor. It covered the deficit by imposing taxes on high-income earners, increasing interest on loans, reducing spending, and cutting aid to the other countries.

Although this initially caused some unrest among the people, it later turned into a surplus of hundreds of billions of kronor. The government immediately took steps to spend this surplus for the benefit of the people. It was used to solve the unemployment problem that existed in Sweden at that time, and to build schools, childcare centers and elders’ homes across the country. The people were motivated to re-elect Ingvar Carlsson as their Prime Minister for a second time through the trust, love and respect that they had built for him.

In addition to being prime minister, Carlsson was previously Minister of Education (1969-1973), Minister of Housing (1973-1976) and Minister of the Environment (1985-1986). He also led the Swedish Social Democratic Party for 10 years (1986-1996) and was the leader of the opposition in the Swedish Parliament from 1991 to 1994. It was the Carlsson government that worked towards Sweden’s accession to the European Union on January 1, 1995.

Saying that “staying in the same occupation for a long time can lead to boredom and problems,”  Ingvar Carlsson resigned from the party leadership and the post of prime minister in 1995 but the people wanted him to continue in public life as he  had much more to contribute to his homeland and the rest of the world. He chaired the 2001 Gothenburg Inquiry Committee, the 1994 Rwandan Genocide Commission, and the Bergman Foundation. In 1995, Shridath Ramphal of the Commonwealth Secretariat and Ingvar Carlsson co-chaired the Commission on International Development and Security, Global Governance in the Context of Globalization.

“I was born into a poor family on November 9, 1934 in the Borås area. My father, Olof Carlsson, who was a worker in a coffee factory, died in the factory when I was 12-years old. Then my mother, Ida, worked hard to educate me and my two brothers. She worked at a garment factory. I still remember how she , in addition to her job, cleaned the stairs of a store to earn money to fix my protruding front teeth when I was 14-years old.

“Later, when I was the minister of education, I worked to increase the allowances for school children to 400-485 kronor. During my time as the prime minister, I was also able to increase the representation of women in Parliament to 50%. It gave me the opportunity to repay what my country did for me in terms of education  as well as for the suffering my mother endured for me,” Ingvar said so with great emotion. Apart from that, it is Prime Minister Carlsson who has taken steps to give women the right to work in any field and to provide free dental and medical treatment to children under the age of 18.

Priyanwada with ICarlson. The red book he is holding is his autobiography ‘I sällskap med döden’ (Close to Death)

“My first job at the age of 15 was delivering on a bicycle cheese, butter and sweets to homes for a grocery store. At that time, children from poor families often had their education interrupted. However, my brothers and I somehow continued our education.”  Ingvar was later conferred an honorary degree in philosophy from Lund University in Sweden and an honorary degree in economics from Northwest University in the United States.

He was fortuitously introduced to Swedish parliamentary politics  in a fortuitous way during his final year at Lund University when then Prime Minister Tage Erländer visited Lund University for a discussion.  The young Ingvar, who was the chairman of the socialist student union, was also present.  Seeing his abilities and talents, the prime minister discussed his skills with his secretary, Olof Palme (later prime minister) and engaged him to work in his office. Here he was assigned to prepare the PM’s speeches, answer letters, meet with party leaders and department officials, organize trips, and perform many other important tasks.

The handsome young Ingvar met Ingrid, a beautiful young woman studying library administration and belonging to a wealthy Swedish business family at the university. Recognizing his talent and boundless courage, Ingrid immediately became close to him and later married him. They have two daughters, the eldest, Ingela Karlsson, is involved in sports, one of her father’s favorite hobbies, while the younger, Pia Karlsson, is involved in politics.

Lund University made the former prime minister its first honorary fellow in 2024, conferring its highest honor on him.

“I’ve loved picking mushrooms since I was a little boy. It’s my favorite hobby. Even when I was the prime minister, I went to the forest to pick mushrooms. Then the security guards were  a big nuisance,”  says Ingvar, who values freedom. In Sweden, which is rich in forests and rocks, his other hobbies include walking in the forests full of pine, birch, aspen and oak trees, which grow tall and lush, and playing football and skiing.

Apart from that, Ingvar, who also ventured into writing after retiring from being prime minister, has now published several books including his autobiography. “I am now a retired civil servant. I receive a pension that is sufficient to live on. I don’t need government vehicles, housing, or security guards. We don’t have such a system in our country,” he told me.

He says with great pleasure that the best friend he made in international politics was Rajiv Gandhi, the Prime Minister of India, and that the first Asian country he visited on a diplomatic mission was Sri Lanka in 1963 when Mrs. Bandaranaike was prime minister. This was for an international conference on youth affairs held in Colombo.

“Sri Lanka is a very beautiful country that produced the world’s first woman prime minister. Although a country full of resources, it still depends on foreign aid. Honest leadership and the support of the people are essential for the development of a country.

“When I was born, my country was poor. Many people migrated to America. Yet, the leaders and the people of Sweden have served honestly and devotedly for the development of our country. Today, we provide aid to other countries as well.” Ingvar said. “The leader of a country must first be honest with the people. Likewise, a leader must always set an example to others. Connecting religion to the politics of a country is something that should not be done. I see it as one of the main reasons that has created this conflict situation throughout the world.”

It was my fellow Swedish writer Priyangwada Banduwardena, who made it possible for me to have this wonderful conversation with the former Swedish Prime Minister whom I met with her at the bus stop that day when Ingvar Carlsson very cordially accepted our invitation to join us at lunch.

“Ingvar, what do you want me to fix for our lunch?” Priyanvada asked. “Anything you like, Priya. I’ll come at one o’ clock,” he promised.

His wife, who suffers from Alzheimer’s disease, lives in a local public nursing home, while Ingvar lives alone in a small apartment, cooking and doing all the household work himself. The then 90-year-old Ingvar, who had driven his own car, appeared at my friend’s door sharp at one o’ clock. He spent about two hours with us, joking around happily and in a very relaxed manner.

The meal we cooked that day included new potatoes with his favorite yellow mushroom (Yellow Kantharalle), and ended with his favorite dessert, blueberry cake. The mushrooms and blueberries were picked by Priyanwada from the forest.

“I am now just a retired civil servant. But my country has given me so much. I am still working hard for it.” He still actively participates in the work of his party and, when necessary, offers his maximum support to the work of the state apparatus. Ingvar is still an indispensable person for the Social Democratic Party of Sweden today. Wherever something important happens in the party, Ingvar is inevitably there.

From the wonderful information I gathered about his life during the short time I spent with him, I understood that Ingvar Carlsson’s character is a role model that our country’s politicians can and should emulate. If that happens, the day will not be far off when Sri Lanka becomes as developed as Sweden.

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.