Sri Lanka main opposition files no-confidence motion against speaker

ECONOMYNEXT — Sri Lanka’s main opposition, the Samagi Jana Balawegaya (SJB), has filed a motion of no confidence against the Speaker of Parliament for approving the controversial Online Safety Bill allegedly in violation of Supreme Court recommendations.

The SJB said on Monday February 26 that the motion is being filed against Speaker Mahinda Yapa Abeywardena’s “gross misconduct and disregard for the supreme law of the land”.

“He has betrayed the trust of the people and the parliament. It’s time to unite for transparency and accountability,” the party said in a statement.

Apart from SJB leader and Opposition Leader Sajith Premadasa, Chief Opposition MP and SJB MP Lakshman Kiriella and SJB National Organiser MP Tissa Attanayake, former members of the government who are now allied with the SJB also signed the motion on behalf the SJB-led Samagi Jana Alliance. These MPs included G L Peiris, Chandima Weerakkody and Shan Wijayalal de Silva.

MP de Silva is the most recent Sri Lanka Podujana Peramuna (SLPP) legislator to cross over to the SJB. He was also the Senior Vice President of the Sri Lanka Freedom Party (SLFP) which was a constituent party of the SLPP-led coalition government before it broke off to sit in the opposition.

Tamil National Alliance (TNA) MP M A Sumanthiran, a vocal critic of the bill, was also part of the signatories to the motion.

Parliament’s recent passing of the Online Safety Bill (OBS) has been controversial.

The Centre for Policy Alternatives (CPA) said in January that the process followed in enacting bill raised serious questions on law-making and its impact on constitutional democracy. The organisation urged the government to replace the act with a law that “genuinely addresses” concerns on online safety.

Claiming that the process of drafting the OSA was shrouded in secrecy, CPA said the rushed manner of its passage raises questions as to the intentions of the government in enacting a law that has significant implications for fundamental rights and the rule of law in Sri Lanka.

“CPA has previously commented on the substance and process followed with the Bill and challenged its constitutionality. In light of recent events surrounding the enactment of the OSA, CPA condemns the enactment of such a draconian law that can further limit freedom of speech and the right to dissent,” the organisation said. (Colombo/Feb26/2024)