Protests erupt in Delhi as India dismisses Epstein file reference to Modi

India yesterday rejected references to Indian Prime Minister Narendra Modi in investigative material linked to convicted sex offender Jeffrey Epstein, even as protests broke out in New Delhi and the Opposition demanded an explanation in Parliament.

Hundreds of demonstrators gathered at Jantar Mantar in the capital after media reports highlighted an email in a newly released tranche of US documents that allegedly referred to Modi and his July 2017 official visit to Israel. The protest was organised by the Indian Youth Congress, the youth wing of the Opposition Indian National Congress.

India’s External Affairs Ministry said it had “seen reports of an email message from the so-called Epstein files that has a reference to the Prime Minister and his visit to Israel.”

“Beyond the fact of the Prime Minister’s official visit to Israel in July 2017,” the Ministry said, “the rest of the allusions in the email are little more than trashy ruminations by a convicted criminal, which deserve to be dismissed with the utmost contempt.”

The documents form part of a broader release of material connected to Epstein, who was convicted in the US of soliciting prostitution and died in a New York jail in 2019. The files reportedly contain names and communications involving political and business figures from several countries. None of those named have been charged with offences related to Epstein’s activities.

In New Delhi, protesters accused the Government of failing to respond transparently. “We want answers. The silence from the Prime Minister’s Office is unacceptable,” one Youth Congress organiser said at the rally.

Mumbai Youth Congress President Zeenat Shabrin said the controversy was affecting India’s international standing and called for the Prime Minister to clarify the references.

The Opposition Congress party has sought an adjournment motion in the Lok Sabha to enable debate on the matter. Parliamentary exchanges have since turned heated, with Opposition members questioning the Government’s response and pressing for further clarification.