Sri Lanka’s Anura Dissanayake ready to debate opposition leader Premadasa

ECONOMYNEXT — The Samagi Jana Balawegaya (SJB) and the leftist National People’s Power (NPP), parties led by Sri Lanka’s top two opposition contenders for the presidency, have challenged each other for a televised election debate.

SJB member Chandima Weerakkody told reporters that the NPP should take up the challenge.

“We have our economic team. The JVP says they have their own team headed by Sunil Handunneththi, who is said to be their finance minister. Come to a debate, and allow to be questioned before the people,” the MP said.

Handunneththi, who heads the NPP’s economic council, said the party is happy to debate, but on the condition that SJB leader and opposition leader Sajith Premadasa debates NPP leader Anura Kumara Dissananayake.

“We’re very happy. There is no issue. For the debate to truly be a success, we propose to them that, rather than talk to the media here and there, invite us in writing. We’re ready to have this debate with Sajith Premadasa. Our leader Comrade Anura Kumara Dissanayake is ready for that,” said Handunneththi.

A previous challenge issued by the ruling Sri Lanka Podujana Peramuna (SLPP) to Dissanayake to debate Power & Energy Minister Kanchana Wijesekara was turned by the NPP who said Wijesekara would have to debate the NPP’s trade union leader Wasantha Samarasinghe.

Sri Lanka does not have a history of televised presidential debates apart from one discussion attended by Premadasa and Dissanayake in 2019 in the run-up to that year’s presidential election. SLPP candidate Gotabaya Rajapaksa, the eventual victor, did not participate.

The NPP currently leads at least one opinion poll on voting intention, at a comfortable margin from the SJB, with the SLPP and President Ranil Wickremesinghe’s United National Party (UNP) trailing behind.

The NPP’s rivals have criticised the Marxist-Leninist Janatha Vimukthi Peramuan (JVP)-led outfit for what they claim is its lack of a coherent policy for economic development. (Colombo/Apr03/2024)