Barista unveils cutting-edge “Happiness Hub” to elevate food preparation and distribution

In a bold move to enhance operational efficiency and aggressive expansion while maintaining high standards across its café network, Barista, Sri Lanka’s leading café chain, has officially inaugurated its new state-of-the-art facility, the “Happiness Hub,” in Peliyagoda. This facility will serve as the central hub for procurement, food preparation, storage, and distribution for Barista’s expansive network of cafés.

The grand opening was marked by the presence of Barista’s Directors Hiran Embuldeniya and Nath Kottegoda, CEO/Director Dilupa Pathirana, along with the Head Office team and staff from across the company’s cafés.

CEO Dilupa Pathirana emphasized the significance of this development: “The Happiness Hub represents a crucial step in our journey toward enhancing operational efficiency, maintaining product consistency, and supporting our growth. By consolidating procurement, production, and distribution under one roof, we aim to uphold the high standards while getting benefited from economies of scale. This initiative aligns with our ongoing commitment to innovation and excellence in the coffee industry.”

The facility is set up to ensure uniformity in taste, and quality across Barista’s 41 cafés. This centralization will not only optimize production processes, but also reduce costs through bulk purchasing, and improve overall supply chain efficiency. Stringent quality control measures are in place to monitor food safety and ensure top-notch food preparation standards.

Strategically located near the Highway entrance, the Happiness Hub is well-positioned for efficient inventory management and faster delivery of supplies. The facility’s design supports better logistical operations, preserves food hygiene and minimizes food waste through optimized ingredient usage and bulk preparation.

In addition to its operational functions, the Happiness Hub includes a training school for aspiring kitchen staff. This educational component will equip future talent with essential skills in food preparation, logistics, and café management. Currently, a dynamic team of coffee enthusiasts operates the facility, with plans to expand the team as Barista’s network continues to grow.

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.