Ties among Japan, India and Sri Lanka seen as crucial for regional development

The critical importance of growing ties among Japan, India and Sri Lanka for regional development was stressed by the founder of the Pathfinder Foundation Milinda Moragoda recently. Among other things, he also pointed to the crucial significance of growing India-Sri Lanka connectivity in taking development to Northern Sri Lanka.

A Pathfinder Foundation press release said in this connection: ‘Milinda Moragoda, Founder of the Pathfinder Foundation, delivered a keynote address highlighting the importance of trilateral cooperation between Japan, Sri Lanka, and India. The event, held at the newly renovated Japanese embassy, brought together high-level representatives from all three countries and was attended by representatives of Japanese investors in Chennai, the Japanese Chamber of Commerce in Chennai, and key members of the Sri Lankan business community.

‘The trilateral trade and investment promotion mission was organised by the Japanese Chamber of Commerce in Chennai and the Japanese embassy in Colombo in collaboration with JETRO. Coincidentally, Pathfinder Foundation participated in this important trilateral promotional event that took place on the last day of Japanese ambassador Mizukoshi Hideaki’s tenure in Sri Lanka.

‘In his keynote speech, Moragoda expressed deep appreciation for Ambassador Mizukoshi’s influential role during a critical period for Sri Lanka. The ambassador’s leadership, particularly during Sri Lanka’s economic crisis, was praised for his steadfast support of the country and its people. Moragoda noted that the ambassador was pivotal in promoting key projects that would positively impact Sri Lanka’s economic recovery and development.

‘The event also served as a platform to discuss the growing potential for trilateral cooperation between Japan, Sri Lanka and India.  Moragoda emphasised the importance of investing in the Northern Province of Sri Lanka, a region ripe with opportunities, particularly in the power and energy sectors. He stressed that strengthening connectivity between India and Sri Lanka could unlock significant economic benefits, spur further investment, and enhance regional growth.

‘Dr. Dayaratna Silva, Executive Director of the Pathfinder Foundation, made a comprehensive presentation on the prospects for trilateral cooperation in key sectors such as trade, renewable power and energy connectivity. He highlighted the growing convergence of interests between Japan, Sri Lanka, and India, emphasising leveraging shared opportunities in the energy sector. He outlined specific projects that could foster deeper ties, promoting a mutually beneficial framework for sustainable power and energy development that would connect with the larger regional network. The Pathfinder Foundation was represented at the event by its Chairman, Bernard Goonetilleke, and Director PF, Ahmad A. Jawad.’

CSE turnover hits Rs. 7 billion mark accompanied by notable number of crossings

SLT-MOBITEL launches Sri Lanka’s first ‘Fibre To The Room,’ making homes smarter

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.