CSE to host workshop on new mandatory IFRS Sustainability Disclosure Standards

The Colombo Stock Exchange (CSE) will be hosting a free online workshop on the implementation of the International Financial Reporting Standards (IFRS) Sustainability Disclosure Standards, on Tuesday, June 23, 2026, from 1:00 p.m. to 4:30 p.m.

The workshop will be conducted in collaboration with the United Nations Sustainable Stock Exchange Initiative (UN SSE), International Finance Corporation (IFC) and International Financial Reporting Standards (IFRS) Foundation.

The International Sustainability Standards Board (ISSB) Sustainability Standards, first released in June 2023, consists of IFRS S1, ‘General Requirements for Sustainability-related Financial Information’ and IFRS S2 ‘Climate-related Disclosures’, which set the new global standard for corporate sustainability-related disclosure to capital markets. The workshop is open to the public and interested parties may register for it on the CSE website.

The free online workshop will offer participants a unique opportunity to ask questions directly from the IFRS foundation and UN SSE experts that developed the sustainability disclosure standards.

The workshop will be an interactive session with a Q&A session providing a high-level overview.

The forum is ideal for corporates to ensure that report preparers, organisational oversight and staff outside of the reporting environment are familiar with the ISSB Standards.

The workshop will allow corporates to participate in modules focused on governance and leadership, strategy development and implementation, risk management, accounting and finance and sustainability and climate strategy.

The participants will walk away from the workshop being able to build upon the existing resources related to sustainability-related disclosure, apply the ISSB Standard in alignment with the global baseline pursuant to sectoral and regulatory requirements and prepare reports on disclosing sustainability-linked information.

Sri Lanka was counted amongst the first batch of 17 jurisdictions to adopt the ISSB Standards by issuing localised versions of these standards, designated as SLFRS S1 and SLFRS S2, which were effective from January 1, 2025.

The phased adoption of the ISSB Standards, between 2025 and 2030, will ensure inclusiveness as it tailors requirements based on the size of businesses. In 2025, the first 100 listed entities on the CSE based on market capitalisation as of January 1, 2025, were mandatorily required to comply with the new sustainability standards, with this requirement being extended to all listed entities on the Main Board of the CSE beginning on or after January 1, 2026.

By 2027, all listed entities on the CSE, except those listed on the Empower Board, will be required to comply with the standards for financial years beginning on or after January 1, 2027.

The training content was developed collaboratively by the UN SSE, IFRS Foundation and IFC, through its integrated ESG programme implemented in partnership with the State Secretariat for Economic Affairs of Switzerland.