Sri Lanka opposition MP claims president was responsible for predecessor’s exit

ECONOMYNEXT — President Ranil Wickremesinghe was responsible for his predecessor Gotabaya Rajapaksa’s exit since he could’ve contained the Aragalaya protests and resolved the crisis while remaining Prime Minister if he wanted to, opposition MP Ashok Abeysinghe said.

Responding to questions raised by a YouTube channel on Thursday March 07, Abeysinghe said Rajapaksa’s recent “tell-all” book about an alleged conspiracy to oust him should’ve made references to what the main opposition Samagi Jana Balawegaya (SJB) claimed was Wickermesinghe’s decisive role in the former president’s unceremonious departure.

“I can’t comment on the book without reading it. We would like if it had mentioned… because one person who took the lead in ousting him was Mr Ranil Wickremesinghe. If he wanted to, Mr Wickremesinghe could’ve resolved this issue without sending Mr Gotabaya Rajapaksa away. But the moment he became prime minister, Mr Wickremesinghe said he would fully support and provide all facilities to the Aragalaya and then told him to go out through the backdoor and became president,” said Abeysinghe.

“Ideally this must be included in the book. And he must know it too, who was behind this,” he added.

The MP said those responsible for Sri Lanka’s unprecedented financial crisis cannot just get away with it by writing a book.

“The Supreme Court has given a verdict on who is responsible for putting this country in this situation,” he said.

“Their conscience knows this. I think the book maybe has that. But I reiterate that it was Mr Wickremesinghe who was instrumental in his departure,” he added.

Abeysinghe said he does not believe Rajapaksa will get back into active politics.

On his last day in Sri Lanka before resigning from the presidency, Abeysinghe claimed, Prime Minister Wickremesinghe could’ve told Rajapaksa to temporarily relocate to a military base in Trincomalee the way former PM Mahinda Rajapaksa had done until the new PM resolved the crisis.

“The way he now disperses people’s protests, he could’ve dispersed the Aragalaya protestors too. If he had done that, Mr Gotabaya Rajapaksa would still be president. I believe Mr Rajapaksa knows that Mr Wickremesinghe is responsible for his exit,” he said. (Colombo/Mar08/2024)