Voice of Plantation People Organisation Celebrating “International Tea Day” International relevance and local grievances

In a bid to celebrate the International Tea Day, the “Voice of Plantation People Organisation (VOPP),” marked the day  at Deniyaya on May 24, 2026 with the theme being “Let’s Give the Value We Give for Tea Flame to the Lives of the Malaiyaha (Up country) People. The celebrations along with a rally highlighted the necessity of elevating the life standards of Malaiyaha community amidst the decades-long fight for their rights.

Speaking to the Daily mirror,  VOPP President Anthony Jesudasan said: “In line with United Nations’ recognition of May 21 as the International Tea Day, millions of labourers in tea producing regions such as Latin America, Asia, and Africa marked the day with various celebrations.”

Mr. Jesudasan underscored the plight that plantation sector workers in Sri Lanka experience on a daily basis. He said that though they contributed greatly to the tea production and export earnings, their lives remained substandard.  “People are deprived of proper housing facilities and are unable to provide the educational needs of their children.” He further noted: “The welfare and empowerment of the Malaiyaha community in Sri Lanka need to be seriously taken into consideration while marking this special occasion.” He emphasised the right to education and health as wider topics that need more attention from the relevant stakeholders. He also said that on this day people also celebrated the struggles and hardships that they had overcome so far.

Discussing the importance of the theme, he was critical of the estate administrators who discriminate the Malaiyaha community, and said that the Malaiyaha community deserved equal opportunities and facilities that other civilians enjoyed.

In relation to the International Tea Day, the global celebrations took place at Food and Agriculture Organisation (FAO) headquarters in Italy on Thursday, May 21. The theme this year was “Sustaining Tea, Supporting Communities.”

The FAO Director-General, QU Dongyu, inaugurated the event, which highlighted tea’s contributions to livelihoods, cultural heritage, and sustainability of agrifood systems, while placing tea-growing communities at the centre of the observance. According to the world body, recognising the long history and the cultural and economic significance of tea around the world, and the significant role it plays in rural development, poverty reduction and food security in developing countries, the UN General Assembly proclaimed 21 May as International Tea Day, calling on FAO to lead the observance. Tea production and processing are a main source of livelihoods for millions of families. The celebration promotes the sustainable production, consumption, and trade of tea, and offers an opportunity for actors at global, regional and national levels to ensure that the tea sector continues to play a role in reducing extreme poverty, fighting hunger and safeguarding natural resources, the FAO says.