Crisis-hit Sri Lankan hotelier buys restaurant next to Australia’s Gabba Stadium

A top local hotel chain owner who faced an enormous financial crisis during the Covid 19 lock down period and left Sri Lanka to find funds to maintain his local hotels, has ended up in Australia where he has acquired a restaurant next to the Brisbane Cricket Grounds (Gabba Stadium).

This is in partnership with SIRUS Holdings of Australia. After forming a joint venture the business partners hope to invest around Rs. 1 billion in their enterprise. “We plan to acquire a second hotel also adjoining the Gabba Stadium, Prashan Dissanayake, Founder Chairman, Thambapanni Leisure told The Island Financial Review.

“Once the hotel is fully operational, it could accommodate more than 200 persons with a large restaurant, car park and many other amenities to cater to diverse social groups in the area, Dissanayake said.

Dissanayake added: ‘The Brisbane Cricket Ground, commonly known as the Gabba, is a major sports stadium in Brisbane, the capital of Queensland. Australia will be hosting the 2032 Olympics. I hope we will be able to offer a cup of local tea and a meal to Sri Lanka athletes at that time and also hoist the Sri Lankan flag.

‘We have already invested around Rs. 500 million to acquire, refurbish and reopen our first restaurant, Coco Gabba. This restaurant was shut down after the COVID -19 pandemic and we saw the opportunity and acquired this property.

‘Since this project is going to be successful, we are planning to invest in the UAE and have visited and looked for properties in Dubai as well.’

Meanwhile, CEO, SIRUS Holdings, Isuru Yapa said: ‘The Coco Gabba could accommodate around 200 guests and is already gaining in popularity not only among Sri Lankans but among Australians as well.

‘We are also planning to acquire another property close to the restaurant which will be named Ado Gabba’.

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.