Union Assurance celebrates brilliance at Partnership Distribution Annual Awards 2023

Union Assurance, Sri Lanka’s premier Life Insurer, held its Partnership Distribution Annual Awards 2023 at the Monarch Imperial, aimed at recognising brilliance among its Bancassurance and Corporate Channel members. The event was attended by the Union Assurance Executive Committee and Suresh Rajendra from the John Keells Group Executive Committee.

Among the main award winners at the ceremony was Shobitha Nakuleswara, recognised as the ‘Bancassurance Champion of Champions’ from the Commercial Bank Channel while Harsha Wijesinghe won the ‘Best Insurance Relationship Officer’ from the Nations Trust Bank Channel. The Central Region of the Nations Trust Bank Channel and the Colombo North Region of the Commercial Bank Channel won the award for the ‘Best Region.’ Western 1 of the Nations Trust Bank Channel, which includes Colombo North and Colombo Suburb regions and Zone C of the Commercial Bank Channel, which includes Colombo North, Colombo Inner and Wayamba regions, won the awards for the ‘Best Zone’. Praneeth Wimalasiri emerged as the ‘Champion of the Corporate Channel.’

At the ceremony, the Chief Executive Officer at Union Assurance, Senath Jayatilake, stated, “Recognising the strong momentum of the Partnership Distribution Channel, we are pleased to celebrate the exceptional contributions of both our partners and team members. Their dedication has been crucial in achieving our goal in delivering comprehensive, one-stop financial protection solutions to customers. As we move forward, we remain committed to continuously providing outstanding value to our partners, fostering mutual growth, while offering top-tier solutions to enrich the well-being of all.”

The Chief Partnership Distribution Officer at Union Assurance, Wathsala Aluthgedara, stated, “The Partnership Distribution Channel has delivered immense success for the past 14 years, delivering year-on-year growth through strategic collaborations with leading organisations and an expanded national presence. Our dynamic team, aided by innovative technologies, upholds a steadfast commitment to deliver best-in-class solutions that are tailored to meet the unique needs of our valued customers.”

UN Global Compact Network Sri Lanka’s strategic approach catalyses Sustainable Business Solutions

SDC, CCC and SLBA explore Blended Finance instruments to support agricultural transformation

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.