Mega development work to begin in every district from 2027 - President

Colombo, Sep. 7 (Daily Mirror) - The Government is to launch mega development work across all districts next year, with Rs. 2 trillion allocated for capital expenditure and Rs. 2 billion provided for each district secretary to address priority of local development needs, President Anura Kumara Dissanayake said.

A series of public rallies attended by President Anura Kumara Dissanayake began yesterday (06) under the theme, “Two years strong. Progress for all.”

The first phase focused on the Kalutara District, with rallies held in Bulathsinhala and Beruwala.

Addressing the rally in Bulathsinhala, the President said the allocation for capital expenditure would be the highest in the country’s history.

"In the coming year, we expect the most crucial part of government spending is capital expenditure. Next year, we are allocating Rs. 200,000 million in capital expenditure—that is 2 trillion rupees. Never in Sri Lanka's history has such an amount been allocated for capital expenditure,” the President said.

“Not only that, while allocating funds for roads, water, and waste management, we also have District Coordinating Committees. When an issue arises in a district, MPs, together with the District Secretary, must have funds readily available in the district. Funds weren't allocated for this in the budget. "We are sending a reserve fund of Rs. 2,000 million from the budget to every single district," the President said.

President Dissanayake further said the people made a historic decision at the September 21, 2024 Presidential election by rejecting the traditional political system and giving the National People’s Power (NPP) a mandate to govern the country.

He said the decision was further strengthened by the subsequent parliamentary election, in which the NPP secured a historic majority in Parliament.

He said the present government was formed through the support of the people rather than through political deals, financial influence, or the distribution of privileges.

President Dissanayake said previous administrations had created a situation that led to widespread public dissatisfaction and protests. He referred to the events that forced political leaders to leave office as an unprecedented development in Sri Lanka’s political history.

The president also criticized what he described as a deeply rooted system of corruption and political privilege, which he referred to as the “black state”. He said the system had affected politics, the economy, and the rule of law, while ethnic divisions had also been used for political purposes.

"Now, what is our pledge? We give you a guarantee that we will completely eradicate that 'black state'. Those who received protection from that 'black state' are panicking. Those who received security from that 'black state' are panicking. Those who enjoyed privileges from that 'black state' are panicking. Having panicked, what are they saying now? 'No, we must drive them out.' That is what they are saying now—'Drive them out,” the President said.

“To what extent do they want to drive us out? I saw one Member of Parliament saying that corrupt people and criminals can not afford to stay like this—that everyone must unite and drive them out. I saw another MP saying that all including cobras, mongoose and vipers must come together to drive us out,” he added.

“Who are these mongoose? Who are these vipers? Who are these corrupt individuals? Who are these criminals? They are the very group that enjoyed protection and privileges under that 'black state'," the President said.

The President added that the government is committed to dismantling that system and strengthening the rule of law.

He said individuals who had benefited from corruption, political influence, and special privileges under previous administrations were now attempting to oppose the government because they feared losing those protections.

He said ongoing investigations have uncovered a huge amount of wrongdoing, claiming that pursuing every case could leave very few people remaining among those responsible.

He said the government was committed to allowing the relevant authorities to proceed with investigations and legal action rather than protecting individuals based on their political connections.

The President also said that the government would not reverse decisions taken in the public interest despite opposition or pressure from various groups.

He said that the government would continue its efforts to eliminate corruption and ensure that the law is applied equally to all.