Founding of the Federal Party, the B-C Pact, Dudley-Chelva Pact Constituent Assembly and Vadukoddai Resolution

Formation of the Federal Party (Ilankai Thamil Arasu Katchi) in December, 1949, was a turning point. With S. J. V. Chelvanayakam, K. C., as Founder President, and Dr. E. M. V. Naganathan and Mr. V. Navaratnam as Joint Secretaries, the party embarked on a journey which marked a radical departure from the conventional thinking of the past. This was plain from the text of seven resolutions adopted at the first National Convention of the Party, held in Trincomalee in April, 1951. The bedrock of the resolutions was the call to establish a Tamil state within the Union of Ceylon, and the bold assertion that no other solution was feasible.

The trajectory was now becoming manifest. The demand up to this time had been for substantial power sharing within a unitary state. This was now giving way to a strident demand for the emergence of a federal structure, destined to be expanded in due course to advocacy of secession.

The epitome of the resolutions was a critique of the unitary state as a wholly inadequate instrument for the fulfillment of legitimate Tamil aspirations. These were said to be capable of fruition only within the framework of an autonomous Tamil linguistic state forming a unit of the proposed federation. The overriding requirement of preserving the Tamil language and culture, in its pristine integrity, was spelt out explicitly. Territory was identified as the central factor defining the identity of the Tamil people.

From this perspective, a cogent objection was made to government initiatives in respect of colonization schemes which, it was claimed, distorted the demographic character of the areas in question. Asoftening element was introduced by the principle of “non-domination” which purported to allow residual space for other communities and religions.

Although standing out boldly as a landmark in constitutional evolution, the Federal Party resolutions did not carry on their face the hallmark of finality or immutability. In the next two decades, there was still the opportunity for addressing Tamil aspirations within the confines of an undivided country. Unequivocal insistence by the Tamil leadership on secession was yet some years away.

The next two decades saw further attempts, by different governments, to resolve the vexed issues around power sharing. The first of these was the Bandaranaike-Chelvanayakam Pact, signed by the Prime Minister and the leader of the Federal Party on July 26, 1957. There was an air of uneasy compromise surrounding the entire transaction. This was evident from the structure of the pact, which, as one of its three integral parts, contained a section not reduced to writing in any form, but consisting of a series of informal understandings. The essence of the pact was the proposed system of Regional Councils, which were envisaged as an intermediary tier between the central government and local government institutions.

This did break new ground. Not only did the pact confer on the people of the North and East a substantial measure of self-governance through innovative Regional Councils, including in such inherently controversial areas as colonization, irrigation, and land management, but territorial units were conceived of as the recipients of devolved powers. Thus, the Northern Province was envisaged to encompass one area, while the Eastern Province would comprise of two or more units. Of particular significance, the Regional Councils were to be invested with some measure of fiscal autonomy, in that they were not solely dependent on resources allocated by the Treasury, but were empowered to raise revenue through taxation and borrowing.

These, and other, attributes encouraged the impression that Regional Councils, representing the thin end of the wedge, could be a halting place on the road to fully-fledged federation. Certainly, there was no hesitation by out bidders to present the pact in these terms and to agitate virulently against it. The blow back was so intense as to compel the government to abrogate the pact.

In any event, there was the infirmity that the pact, to be implemented by ordinary legislation, would not have the sanctity of a constitutional amendment. Given the volatility of the subject matter, the comfort zone for the minorities was clearly precarious.

The next attempt, eight years later, was by the United National Party, which had vehemently opposed the Bandaranaike- Chelvanayakam Pact. This was the Dudley Senanayake- Chelvanayakam Pact, signed between the leader of the United National Party, at the time Leader of the Opposition, and the leader of the Federal Party. It differed from the Bandaranaike- Chelvanayakam Pact, both contextually and substantively.

As to context, it was signed on March 24, 1965, on the eve of a parliamentary election, to ensure for the United National Party the support of the Federal Party. A disheartening feature was the plainly evident element of duplicity. Once in government, the Prime Minister’s party showed little interest in giving effect to the terms of the pact. Within three years, the Federalist in the Cabinet, Mr. M. Tiruchelvam QC, Minister of Local Government, whose draft White Paper on the authority of District Councils was not acted upon by the government, relinquished his portfolio.

Substantively, the lynch pin of the pact was a system of District Councils whose powers received no definition but were to be resolved by subsequent negotiation. The primary debilitating aspect was the entrenched control of District Councils by the central government, even in regard to action within their vires (powers). This was largely an exercise in expediency which, far from engendering confidence, was almost universally seen as a sleight of hand.

Constitution making was very much at the crossroads in 1970, when the government of Prime Minister Sirimavo Bandaranaike, heading a coalition, was elected with a two- thirds majority. The new administration immediately embarked on the historic task of severing the centuries- old bond with the British Crown, and bringing into being the Republic of Sri Lanka. This was an all-encompassing enterprise, calling for an entirely new point of departure, signified by a comprehensive Constitution.

Thiswas to be drafted by a Constituent Assembly, which commenced its work with the formulation of a set of Basic Resolutions. The second of these, which eventually found expression in Article 2 of the new Constitution, characterized Sri Lanka as a unitary state. The Federal Party moved an amendment to this resolution, proposing that the word “federal” should be substituted for “unitary”.

The Federal Party, participating in the proceedings of there early stages on November 23, 1970, presented a Memorandum and a Model Federal Constitution. The striking feature of this intervention was its flexibility in respect of many critical issues, which saw a distinct hardening of attitudes through the developments of subsequent years. At the time of adoption of the first Republican Constitution, however, the resilience of approach of the Federal Party manifested itself in a variety of ways.

Mr. V. Dharmalingam, the spokesperson for the party on this subject, in his address to the Constituent Assembly on March 16, 1971, scrupulously refrained from insistence on any specific model and made it clear that all matters pertaining to the powers of the federating units and their relationship to the Centre could be freely discussed, once the principle of federalism was accepted. The principle of indivisibility of the Republic of Ceylon was emphatically articulated in the document as a non-negotiable premise. Exercise of the right of self-determination, in its external aspect, was firmly ruled out.

Unlike the Interim Self-Governing Authority document drafted by the LTTE, which sought to bring the President of the International Court of Justice into an arbitral process in the context of settlement of disputes between Centre and Periphery, the Federal Party document was content to vest responsibility in this regard in the Constitutional Court of the Republic, clearly designated the final arbiter. Here, too, an external dimension was studiedly avoided.

Demarcation of the powers and responsibilities of the Centre and the units was done in such a manner as to reserve to the Centre all authority for which there was legitimate need. This is clear from a comparison of the 29 clauses in Article 16 of the Model Constitution of the Federal Party with the provisions contained in the 9th Schedule to the 13th Amendment which forms part of the present Constitution. The former is not materially less extensive than the latter.

In sharp contrast with the acrimony generated in relation to the issue of Muslim representation in the Norwegian- facilitated peace talks between the Government of Sri Lanka and the LTTE, the Federal Party Memorandum had no reservation about conceding to the Muslim community the right to form their own unit in Ampara district.

The Federal Party Memorandum, invoking as its inspiration the principle of “democratic decentralization”, claimed that it was motivated by the basic purpose of achieving integration among the different ethnic groups of the population within a conceptual scheme which offered ample scope for the preservation of their distinct identities. There was, however, the stark admonition that persistent refusal to address these issues in earnest would inevitably propel the minorities to fall back on the residual option of external self-determination, culminating in secession.

The relative moderation of tone and substance reflected in the Federal Party documents, in comparison with far more extreme formulations which dominated the discourse in succeeding decades, met with nothing approximating to reciprocity in the slightest degree. The response came in the form of a sharp rebuke by Mr. Sarath Muttetuwegama, administered on the floor of the Constituent Assembly. Adamant in his refusal to leave the door ajar for any discussion, he declared: “Federalism has become something of a dirty word in the southern parts of this country.” The last opportunity to halt what turned out to be the inexorable march of events was arrogantl and contumaciously spurned.

The pushback came briskly, and with singular ferocity. This was in the form of the Vadukoddai Resolution, adopted by the Tamil United Liberation Front at its first National Convention held on May 14, 1976. The historic significance of this document, marking an irreversible trend, is that it set out for the first time, in the most unambiguous terms, the blueprint for an independent state for the Tamil Nation, embracing the merged Northern and Eastern Provinces.

The catalyst for this development arose from three fundamental features of the Constitution of 1972, which, taken in combination, were seen as a cavalier affront to Tamil aspirations. These characteristics were firm affirmation of the unitary state, the foremost place accorded to Buddhism, and the recognition of Sinhala as the sole official language. Tamil sentiment was convinced that the Rubicon had been crossed.

The first part of the resolution chronicled the grievances, over time, of the Tamil community, their persevering efforts to secure redress, and the unreceptive, indeed dismissive, reaction of successive governments in an unbroken sequence. The second part contained the nucleus of Tamil Eelam. Its scope extended beyond the shores of the Island. The state of Tamil Eelam was to be home not only to the people of the Northern and Eastern Provinces, but to “all Tamil-speaking people living in any part of Ceylon, and to Tamils of Eelam origin living in any part of the world who may opt for citizenship of Tamil Eelam”.

“Restoration and reconstitution of the free, sovereign, secular, socialist state of Tamil Eelam” was declared to be “based on the right of self-determination inherent to every nation”, which had “become inevitable in order to safeguard the very existence of the Tamil Nation in this country”. Giving credence to the document was the idea that the Tamils, as a nation, had an identity distinct and separate from the Sinhalese, with historical habitation of the Northern and Eastern Provinces. The final exhortation was that “This Convention calls upon the Tamil Nation in general, and the Tamil youth in particular, to come forward to throw themselves fully into the sacred fight for freedom, and to flinch not till the goal of a sovereign, socialist state of Tamil Eelam is reached.”

(Excerpted from The Sri Lanka Peace Process: An Inside View by GL Peiris)

A visit to Barbados and experiences as Secretary to Education Ministry

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.