India, Pakistan, and Sri Lanka

Pope Francis was everyone’s favourite papal figure, a progressive who differed considerably from his two predecessors. The first Latin American to hold the post, and the first from the Global South, he was the first to break ground on subjects that had polarised the church, including homosexuality, child sexual abuse, and of course Gaza. Reports indicate that until the last he was in touch with church leaders in Palestine. He was more forthright on the issue than Western leaders, who hesitated to invoke words like genocide. Francis did, and in doing so won the love and the respect of the world.

The world since his death has witnessed a considerable escalation of tensions, including in Gaza and between India and Pakistan. The latter continues to cause much worry. Since Wednesday’s attacks in Pahalgam, Kashmir, Narendra Modi has said he will go “to the ends of the earth” to find the perpetrators. Pakistani authorities have spoken of the attack being “orchestrated” and part of Delhi’s “disinformation” campaign.

Last week, the two countries exchanged retaliatory measures, including the closure of airspace and India’s withdrawal from the Indus Waters Treaty. Meanwhile, Kashmiri students have been facing attacks from far-right groups in India.

India has always prided itself on its power moves, and its suspension of the Water Treaty shows that, when provoked, it can and will withdraw from resource sharing agreements. This has been so whatever the party in power, but it has become a convenient fait accompli for the BJP government, which thrives today on anti-China and anti-Islamabad sentiment. While its border dispute with China has, at least on paper, and at least for now, been resolved, its declaration of retaliation against Pakistan indicates that such issues run deep and, for the Indian political establishment, there can be no backing away.

From India’s perspective, these moves are justified. The Resistance Front (TRF), the terrorist outfit initially thought to have led the attacks, have been linked by Indian officials to Lashkar-e-Taiba, an armed group in Pakistan. Designated as a terrorist outfit by the UK and US in 2001, Lashkar-e-Taiba has since come to encompass several organisations, including Jama’at-ud-Da’wah, thought to be responsible for the Mumbai attacks in 2008. Pakistan has since expressed its willingness to proscribe such outfits, but this does not seem to have assuaged India’s suspicions about their links with the country.

At a press conference soon after the recent attacks, Indian Foreign Secretary Vikram Misri said that the Water Treaty will be “in abeyance” until Pakistan “credibly and irrevocably abjures its support for cross-border terrorism.” The suspension, though temporary, would restrict water flows from Indus, Jhelum, and Chenab to Pakistan. It has been noted, however, that a complete suspension would be impossible: India has politicised water in ways few countries have, but water levels from May to September are so high as to make it impossible for any country, even India, to stop them from flowing into Pakistan.

Yet all this is peripheral. As with the US, there is a strong bipartisan consensus in India over security and defence issues. The Indian Congress Party is doing all it can to appear calm and calculated, but when in power, it responded in much the same way, deploying a series of power moves intended to wrest as many concessions from its rivals and neighbours while granting few concessions from its side.

Sri Lanka’s diplomatic encounters with New Delhi during the 1980s are a case in point: while India pushed Sri Lanka to negotiate with Tamil militants, as K. M. de Silva has noted it did little to make things easier for the country’s government. The result was that Delhi pushed too hard, leading to the inevitable pushback from the south (the JVP) and the north (the LTTE) after 1987.

Where India is concerned, there is, of course, a difference between Sri Lanka and Pakistan. India’s rivalry with Pakistan, and China, has been ordained by geography: it has become almost inevitable, a sine qua non of inter-state relations in South Asia and the wider Indian Ocean. Its interventions in Sri Lanka during the 1980s showed that Delhi was capable of extending its hard power beyond the subcontinent. While India has shied away from direct confrontations with Colombo since – not least because New Delhi cannot afford another Vietnam here, as it did with the IPKF fiasco in 1987 – it has tried to make up for its lack of connectivity through a series of initiatives to literally and metaphorically bridge the gap. This has been resisted by many Sri Lankans, as well as foreign policy experts who have, not unjustifiably, argued it will give India the upper hand that India has vis-à-vis its neighbours over resources like water – as its dispute with Pakistan shows.

India’s response to the Pahalgam attacks raises questions about what that country is capable of in situations of war and direct military confrontation. I find it unlikely that this country will face such a confrontation with Delhi, at least any time soon.

And yet, as Rathindra Kuruwita suggests in a recent piece to  The Diplomat, Sri Lanka cannot afford connectivity that gives the upper hand to the other party. This will be contested by the Indian political elite, who constantly dwell on India’s good, brotherly intentions and instincts. Those intentions came to the fore in 2022, when Delhi did what no other country could, in assisting Sri Lanka towards recovery. Yet even such assistance has not assuaged the fears which Sri Lankans have about India’s intentions and motives. Delhi’s response to the attacks in Kashmir will reinforce such fears, while evoking among most Sri Lankans sympathy for the victims of those attacks, and their families.

Uditha Devapriya is a regular commentator on history, art and culture, politics, and foreign policy who can be reached at udakdev1@gmail.com. Together with Uthpala Wijesuriya, he heads U & U, an informal art and culture research collective.

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.