Poor schools on chopping block

The Opposition asked the government, in Parliament on Friday, whether the latter would go ahead with its plan to close down low-attendance schools, and if so, what would happen to the students in them. The government said the number of students would not be the sole criterion for what it described as ‘school restructuring’, and factors such as population density and transport would also be taken into consideration. Its response smacked of obfuscation.

President Anura Kumara Dissanayake, speaking in Parliament, in July 2025, said 98 state-run schools were without new admissions. Pointing out that about 15% schools had fewer than 50 students each, and about two-thirds of schools had fewer than 100 students each, the President said a strategy to overcome the problem might necessitate the permanent closure of some of those seats of learning. According to teachers’ trade unions and organisations dedicated to protecting universal free education, most of these low-enrolment schools are situated in rural areas. The predicament of these schools is usually attributed to several factors such as the development of public transport, which has enhanced students’ mobility and lessened their dependence on rural schools which are in a state of neglect.

The Ceylon Teachers Union (CTU) has accused the government of trying to close down low-enrolment schools across the country, and redeploy teachers currently working in them to fill vacancies elsewhere. There are 10,146 state-run schools in Sri Lanka. Of them 9,750 are under Provincial Councils and 396 are national schools. About 800 rural schools have already been closed down during the past several decades, and it is feared that many more will face the same fate in the near future.

One of the pithy slogans the JVP coined during its second armed uprising in the late 1980s was ‘Kolombata kiri, gamata kekiri’ (‘milk for Colombo and melon for the village’), which highlighted the glaring urban bias in the allocation of state resources for development. Those who voted the JVP-led NPP into power, expected underprivileged schools to be developed as a national priority. But all signs are that they will be left with neither ‘milk’ nor ‘melon’.

Previous governments, which the JVP/NPP has condemned as a curse, bore the cost of operating low-enrolment schools. True, they also closed down some low-attendance schools but did not plunge head first into doing so. What one gathers from the statements made by the JVP/NPP heavyweights, including President Dissanayake, is that the government is planning to go full throttle on the school closure project.

Closing down low-attendance schools may make economic sense for the NPP and the Bretton Woods Twins, but that is bound to lead to serious social issues. The government has offered to provide the students in schools earmarked for closure with transport to other schools. This offer is based on the assumption that transport is the sole factor that has prevented them from attending urban schools. There are other reasons why they have had to stay in the underprivileged schools.

Prudence demands that the JVP-led NPP government refrain from rushing to close down the low-enrolment schools and explore ways and means of making them attractive to more students who cannot attend urban schools for reasons other than transport issues. Otherwise, there might be an increase in the school dropout rate in the rural sector. President Dissanayake, in his aforesaid speech, informed Parliament that the school dropout figures had risen from 16,673 in 2019 to 20,759 in 2022, before plateauing at 20,755 in 2024. Everything possible must be done to bring the dropout rate down in the shortest possible time. A steep school dropout rate is far more than a mere statistic; it is a symptom of systemic social issues.

The state has a strong justification for bearing the cost of operating low-attendance schools, for such expenditure helps reduce dropouts, promote educational equity, prevent social problems and build human capital. The government must handle this sensitive issue with great care and ensure that the poor students will have at least ‘melon’.

It is said that he who opens a school door, closes a prison. Ironically, questions happened to be raised in Parliament about the closure of underprivileged schools soon after the government’s declaration that it would spend Rs. 4.36 billion to construct a new prison in Kandy.

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.