Cinnamon Air announces new flight routes to elevate tourism experience in Sri Lanka

Cinnamon Air, Sri Lanka’s premier domestic airline, has announced the launch of two new daily scheduled flights connecting Kandy and Sigiriya with the South Coast destinations Koggala and Hambantota.

These flights are set to commence on 1st November 2024 and will operate until 30th April 2025, strategically timed to cater to the influx of foreign travellers during the winter holiday season. These cross-country flights are designed to enhance convenience and reduce travel time while ensuring an unparalleled experience for those who wish to explore Sri Lanka’s South Coast after visiting the Cultural Triangle or the Central Hill Country.

These flight routes are meticulously crafted to meet the increasing demand for efficient and luxurious travel within Sri Lanka. With these flights, passengers can easily journey from any part of the Cultural Triangle (through Sigiriya) or the Central Hill Country (through Kandy) to the serene South Coast in 40 to 50 minutes, compared to 6 to 7 hours on the road—providing travellers with more time to indulge in the island’s idyllic golden sandy beaches and exciting natural wonders. These seamless cross-country connections enable quick air travel to Hambantota, the gateway to Yala National Park, and Koggala, an idyllic base for exploring the coastal cities of Galle, Weligama, Mirissa, Dickwella and Tangalle.

The routes are serviced by Cinnamon Air’s fleet of Cessna 208 aircraft, and the route originating from Kandy to the South coast is served by the amphibian variation, offering a unique travel experience involving taking off on water. These aircraft are specifically chosen to enhance the passenger experience, featuring large windows that provide unobstructed views of Sri Lanka’s diverse and stunning landscapes, including panoramic vistas of lush forests, rolling hills, and pristine coastlines.

Sean Dwight, Chief Executive Officer of Cinnamon Air said, “We are eager to launch this flight service, which not only enhances access to Sri Lanka’s most popular tourist destinations but also reinforces the island’s image as a high-end travel destination. In recent times, we have observed that foreign tourists’ travel patterns within Sri Lanka have been changing—from extensive tours covering various locations to more focused tours involving a small number of locations or regions such as the Cultural Triangle, the Central Hill Country, and the South Coast. As a result, we have carefully designed these two flights to meet the needs of international travellers who are visiting Sri Lanka, providing swift, comfortable, and scenic journeys between some of the country’s most treasured locations. As we continue to expand our network, we remain true to our goal of making Sri Lanka’s incredible diversity more accessible while ensuring that every journey with Cinnamon Air is a memorable experience. With the introduction of this new route, Cinnamon Air reaffirms its commitment to elevating the tourism experience in Sri Lanka.”

Ceylon Energy and HJT China marks completion of Maho and Ampara 33kV power distribution lines

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.