Prime Residencies commences The Golf construction

Prime Residencies officially marked the commencement of construction on its latest ultra-luxury residential development, The Golf, with its groundbreaking ceremony held at the project site on Lake Drive, Colombo 8.

The event brought together key stakeholders and project partners to mark the ceremonial breaking of the ground, signalling that a vision long in the making is currently under construction.

Bordering and overlooking the prestigious Royal Colombo Golf Club, The Golf is part of Prime Residencies’ One Collection — a rare and limited collection of ultra-luxury residences shaped by elegance, refinement and timeless design.  Framed by sweeping fairway views and lush greenery, the development offers a rare sense of tranquillity and prestige, bringing together thoughtfully crafted interiors, elevated amenities and sophisticated living spaces to create an address of remarkable distinction.

At The Golf, every detail has been designed to reflect a lifestyle inspired by grace, privacy and the enduring prestige of the greens.

Priced from Rs.95,700,000 upwards, residences begin from the second floor. As a boutique development, The Golf totals in 66 curated two- and three-room bedroom residencies and is uniquely positioned to make the most of the panoramic views that define the address.

The development will be built on a pile foundation by K.D Piling (Pvt.) Limited, reflecting the structural integrity and construction quality that Prime Group brings to every project.

Among the standout features of the development are private plunge pools in selected residences, that offer unparalleled views overlooking the fairways of the Royal Colombo Golf Club, creating a unique combination of calm, privacy and elevated living unfolding under open skies, further accentuated by immaculate greenery.

Double car parking is facilitated through a car hoist system.

The rooftop level has been designed as an exclusive destination in its own right, housing both a kids and adults pool, a fully-equipped gymnasium, a celebration hall, The Sunset Lounge, a poolside bar and the Little Greens Club, an open-air outdoor space where children can play, read and explore in a relaxed rooftop setting.

The residences come with fully fitted kitchens, while at ground level, a thoughtfully designed arrival lobby and lounge, alongside on-site concierge services, set the tone from the moment residents’ step through the door.

“The Golf is one of the rarest residential addresses in Colombo. Opportunities like this are exceptionally uncommon, as only a select few home owners have the privilege of living with a direct frontage to this prestigious landmark. This is truly a rare development, combining exclusivity, prestige and an exceptional lifestyle in a highly sought after area,” said Prime Group Group Chairman Premalal Brahmanage.