Scandals, probes and waiting games

Committees and commissions come in handy for a government embroiled in scandals and desperate to play for time. They also help obfuscate issues under public scrutiny and open escape routes for the culprits with direct links to the ruling party. A Parliamentary Select Committee (PSC) is the optimal choice for a government struggling to stave off the adverse political impact of a scandal. Successive governments have misused the PSC process to further their interests.

The NPP government has recently decided to appoint two PSCs, one on the delayed Provincial Council (PC) polls and the other on the controversial release of 323 red-flagged containers without Customs inspection from the Colombo Port in January 2025. The first PSC is an attempt to delay the PC polls until the completion of the delimitation of electoral boundaries instead of amending the PC Elections Act to allow the PC polls to be held under the Proportional Representation system. The government members of the second PSC have been defending the NPP vis-à-vis damning allegations of wrongdoing against it.

One may consider it too early to prognosticate on how the ‘container PSC’ will conduct its investigation, which is yet to get underway. But it is doubtful whether the NPP government or a probe committee, dominated by its members, will proceed with an open mind to get at the truth; the container scandal has the potential to be the undoing of the current dispensation. There’s the rub.

It is only wishful thinking that any investigation conducted by a committee headed by a government MP into an allegation against one of the ruling party heavyweights will be impartial. Expecting such a probe to help bring a wrongdoer to justice is no less ill-advised than ‘seeking the help of a female clairvoyant to catch a thief who happens to be her own son’, as the old local saying goes.

Ideally, parliamentary committees should have Opposition MPs as their heads if the public is to repose any trust in them. One may recall that the COPE (Committee on Public Enterprises) on the Treasury bond scams during the Yahapalana government could maintain a semblance of impartiality because it was headed by an Opposition MP—Sunil Handunnetti (JVP).

The Yahapalana MPs, representing the UNP, did their utmost to manipulate the COPE process to bolster their contention that there had been no scam. If one of those MPs had been appointed the Chairman of the COPE, they would have been able to achieve their goal with ease. They however succeeded in having the then Prime Minister Ranil Wickremesinghe’s name left out of the COPE report. The UNP and the JVP were on a political honeymoon at that time.

Ironically, the JVP had Wickremesinghe arrested, two months ago, for alleged misuse of state funds during his visit to London after securing the presidency with the help of the SLPP. The amount of money he is alleged to have misused in the UK pales into insignificance in comparison to the losses caused by the Treasury bond scams, the economic impact of which is yet to be fully calculated, according to Prime Minister Dr. Harini Amarasuriya.

It is hoped that the container PSC will not go the same way as the one appointed by the UPFA government in 2012 to prepare the ground for impeaching the then Chief Justice Dr. Shirani Bandaranayake. The UPFA members of that PSC pandered to the whims and fancies of the Rajapaksas, and their Opposition counterparts voted with their feet, calling the probe a witch-hunt, and nobody took the PSC findings seriously––and rightly so. That is the fate which befalls all probes, PSC or otherwise, when they are aimed at furthering the interests of those in power.

At this rate, it will not be possible to have the container scandal properly probed until the next regime change. No government can remain in power indefinitely.

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.