‘Zoho Corporation registering landmark achievements in Sri Lanka’

Renowned global technology company, Zoho Corporation, founded in India, announced that it is serving 100 million users worldwide across its 55+ business applications, with particular emphasis on the outstanding 30% revenue growth achieved in the Sri Lankan market during 2023. The Corporation crossed the USD 1 billion market in 2022.

Gibu Mathew, vice president and GM, Asia Pacific of Zoho Corp, speaking to journalists at the Kingsbury, Colombo, stressed the corporate’s achievements in the Lankan market.

Mathew said: ‘This progress in the local market was led by strong growth in demand for Zoho Workplace, an integrated productivity suite, Zoho CRM, a customer management solution, as well as Zoho Recruit, a recruitment platform.

‘In the area of data privacy, it is the governance of users’ personal identifiable information (PII), as well as data collection, exchange, and transactions online that are noteworthy.

‘Secure handling of this data helps build consumer confidence in a brand or organization. Today, data on every visit, click, or online activity is being captured, mined, and used by organizations, retailers, and technology vendors to deliver personalized campaigns to target consumers. This data is usually utilized by site owners for marketing purposes. Customers are increasingly aware of the potential for data abuse and are savvy enough to define their privacy settings when browsing the web.

‘Today, customers are already voting for privacy with their wallets by choosing to shop with businesses that value customer data privacy. With data transfers happening at lightning speed, customers need to be able to trust corporations with personal information, including banking and geographical data. Erosion of that trust means having that customer walk out the digital door, never to return.

‘In Sri Lanka, digital transformation is a very big, lengthy and the Group observed a lot of interest shown by various stakeholders in it.

‘Businesses will see more value as a result and that will drive the transformation efforts of ordinary businesses too.’

People’s Bank and George Steuart Solutions join forces to promote solar energy in Sri Lanka

Hela Apparel Holdings acquires major UK-based apparel brand licensing house

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.