EFL 3PL expands operations in India with launch of flagship distribution centre in Mumbai

EFL 3PL India Team with EFL Global Team at the Brand Launch DC Opening Ceremony

EFL Global’s Founder/President Hanif Yusoof (right) and Global CEO Senthilnathan Shanmugam unveiling the plaque

Spread across 175,000 sq ft, the company has invested $ 5 m in establishing the state of the art Grade ‘A’ warehousing facility

EFL 3PL, a subsidiary of EFL Global yesterday announced the launch of its flagship Grade A warehousing facility in the vibrant Bhiwandi region of Mumbai.

This strategic expansion, with an investment of $ 5 million, marks a significant milestone in EFL 3PL’s commitment to enhancing its presence in India and solidifying its position as a leader in end-to-end logistics solutions and supply chain management.

With over 25 years of experience in the Indian market, EFL has established itself as a trusted provider of freight logistics services. The addition of the state-of-the-art warehouse facility further strengthens both EFL & EFL 3PL’s capabilities, offering truly end-to-end services to their diverse clientele across various sectors. Spanning an impressive 175,000 square feet, the Grade A warehouse features modern facilities and advanced logistics technologies. EFL 3PL’s holistic approach to logistics solutions, infused with latest technology and innovation, ensures the dynamic requirements of clients are met efficiently and effectively.

EFL Chief Executive Officer Rooso Ramachandran said: “We are delighted to inaugurate our flagship warehouse in Mumbai. This investment underscores our dedication to delivering exceptional service to our clients and meeting the evolving needs of the Indian market. With the launch of this state-of-the-art facility, we are not only expanding our operational footprint but also reaffirming our commitment to providing innovative and reliable logistics solutions. This warehouse represents the culmination of extensive planning and investment. We are confident that it will play a pivotal role in driving efficiency and value for our customers while assuring a one-stop-shop solution to all their logistics needs. We look forward to further strengthening our presence in India and contributing to the growth and success of our clients.”

EFL 3PL specialises in providing customised contract logistics solutions, offering clients a distinct competitive advantage through an optimised and efficient supply chain. From basic warehousing to advanced 3PL solutions, the company’s strategic integration of cutting-edge technologies empowers it to meet customers’ unique and time-sensitive needs effectively.

EFL 3PL is a subsidiary of EFL Global, which has established its footprint in 39 countries to date.