CEAT Kelani honours long-serving employees and top performers

Recipients of CEAT Kelani’s Long Service Awards for 25 years of service with the Company’s senior management

CEAT Kelani Holdings, the manufacturer of half of Sri Lanka’s pneumatic tyre requirements and producer of CEAT, the country’s highest-selling tyre brand, has reaffirmed its commitment to a people-first culture by honouring employee loyalty and excellence at its 2026 Long Service Awards and Best Employee Awards.

A total of 76 employees were recognised for their service milestones, comprising 25 employees completing five years, 19 employees reaching 10 years, and 32 employees marking an exceptional 25 years with the company. The significant number of employees celebrating 25 years of service underscores the depth of loyalty fostered within the organisation.

The company said its strong retention record is further reflected in the fact that nearly 20 per cent of its workforce has served for more than 15 years, a retention rate that exceeds industry benchmarks and highlights CEAT Kelani Holdings’ sustained ability to attract, engage, and retain talent.

The event also honoured 14 Best Performing Employees representing 13 departments, recognising individuals who have demonstrated outstanding performance, innovation, commitment, and contribution to business success during the financial year. These awards spanned a broad cross-section of the organisation, including Sales, Marketing & Exports, Technical, Quality Assurance, Quality Based Management, Manufacturing operations in Kelaniya and Kalutara, Engineering at both locations, Supply Chain, Finance, Information Technology, Procurement, and Human Resources.

“By recognising both long service and exceptional performance, CEAT Kelani Holdings continues to reinforce a culture that values dedication, achievement, and continuous improvement,” the company’s Vice President – Human Resources, Thushara Hettithantrige said.

“Our sustained focus on employee engagement, learning and development, wellbeing, and career progression has helped build a highly motivated workforce supported by a positive

This commitment to its people has received national recognition, with CEAT Kelani Holdings being named Sri Lanka’s Employer Brand of the Year 2025 at the World HRD Congress Sri Lanka Awards. Further strengthening this recognition, the company’s Vice President – Human Resources Thushara Hettithantrige was honoured as a Topmost HR Leader of Sri Lanka for his role in building a high-performance culture and advancing strategic human resource excellence.

Besides meeting around half of Sri Lanka’s automotive tyre demand, CEAT Kelani exports approximately 20 per cent of its output to 16 countries. The company has invested more than Rs. 8.5 billion in Sri Lanka over the past decade and recently committed a further Rs. 4.5 billion, reinforcing its role as a key contributor to the national economy and a trusted partner to the transport sector.