Sri Lanka Port City ICC unit gets 25-year tax holiday for Rs13.8bn residential towers

ECONOMYNEXT – ICC Port City (Private) Limited, which will build two high-end residential towers and luxury villas in the Colombo Port City, has been given a 25-year tax holiday and half the rate for the next 10 years.

ICC Port City, which is promoted by International Construction Consortium (Private) Limited, will invest 13.8 billion rupees and 66 million dollars in the project, taking land plot number 1-02-05 spanning an area of 13,945 square meters.

ICC Port City will cater to international markets, conduct sales and marketing activities to sell apartments and to engage with foreign investors to draw foreign investment, a gazette notice detailing tax breaks said.

The firm will “also offer the core services of luxury apartments, luxury villas and commercial space for sale or rent as well as serviced apartments and management services extending to rental management services and condominium management services.”

The firm will hire 343 people in the first year and 862 by the second year to engage in design engineering and construction.

The company will get exemptions for import duty, value added tax and excise tax for project related investments.

Sri Lanka is planning to stop giving very long tax holidays as part of raising revenue, under an International Monetary Fund program.

Sri Lanka authorities have said businesses that were promised tax holidays earlier will be given in a type of ‘grandfathering’ process but new ones will be based on different criteria and the underlying Strategic Development Act and Port City laws will be amended

RELATED : Sri Lanka halts Port City, SDP tax breaks, laws to be changed in IMF benchmark

Sri Lanka’s corporate tax rates however are high at 30 percent, compared to about 20 percent for East Asian countries with monetary stability.

Tax holidays of 8 years are given in some East Asian countries and the corporate tax rate of Singapore which has exceptional monetary stability is only 17 percent. VAT rates are also about half of Sri Lanka’s rate.

Colombo Port City is a dollarized special economic zone which will be free of the central bank’s open market operations. (Colombo/July21/2025)