Phoenix Ogilvy and SriLankan Airlines bring home the country’s first APAC Effie Award

Phoenix Ogilvy Sri Lanka and SriLankan Airlines have made history as the first Sri Lankan advertising agency and brand to win at the coveted APAC Effie’s, held recently in Singapore.

The campaign, Relive the Epic of the Ramayana Trail, was the sole entry shortlisted in the Travel and Tourism category from the entire Asia Pacific region and was awarded a Bronze Effie, highlighting the campaign’s role in revitalizing inbound tourism at a crucial time for the nation’s economy.

The APAC Effie Awards are known for recognising campaigns that deliver real business impact through strategic thinking and creative excellence. Winners are selected by an eminent jury comprising 136 senior leaders from advertising agencies, client organisations, media platforms, and marketing consultancies across the Asia-Pacific region. This year’s APAC Effie Awards drew fierce competition, with 123 entries shortlisted across categories in 12 territories, reflecting both the depth of talent and the intensity of the regional competition.

Commenting on the achievement, Saminda Perera, Head of Marketing at SriLankan Airlines, said,

“Winning at the APAC Effie Awards is a tremendous honour for SriLankan Airlines and for the country. This recognition from such a respected jury affirms the impact of our efforts to position Sri Lanka as a destination of deep cultural and spiritual significance for Indian travellers. As the National Carrier, we are proud to have partnered with Phoenix Ogilvy on a campaign that not only supported our business objectives, but also contributed to the revival of tourism which is a vital sector for Sri Lanka’s growth. This achievement inspires us to continue delivering meaningful experiences that connect people, cultures, and nations.”

The campaign Relive the Epic of the Ramayana Trail, developed by Phoenix Ogilvy, was conceived as a strategic initiative to reignite interest in Sri Lanka among Indian travellers, the country’s largest inbound tourism segment which supported Sri Lanka’s tourism sector, a vital growth engine for the country’s economy.

Nation Lanka Finance decides against going ahead with private placement of shares but CSE remains robust

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.