Sri Lanka to gazette Gender Socialisation Equality bill for parliament’s approval

ECONOMYNEXT — Sri Lanka’s Attorney General has cleared a draft bill on Gender Socialisation Equality and will now be gazetted, the government said.

The Government Information Department said on Tuesday March 12 that the cabinet of ministers has approved a proposal by President Ranil Wickremesinghe to publish the bill in the government gazette to be tabled in parliament for its approval.

Wickremesinghe has made the proposal in his capacity as Minister of Women, Child Affairs and Social Empowerment.

The bill, first approved by the cabinet in September 2023, is one of two proposed pieces of legislation that seek to minimise a gender imbalance in socialisation.

Gender socialisation is the process of teaching individuals, young and old, how to behave according to gender roles. Gender roles are socially constructed ideas of what it means to be one’s assigned gender.

In September 2023, the cabinet also granted approval to establish an independent commission under the title of the National Women’s Commission to make recommendations to parliament through the subject minister in mediating in issues related to providing leadership for women’s rights as well as ensuring equality of gender socialisation. This second bill is titled Women’s Empowerment Bill.

President Wickremesinghe alluded to the two bills in a speech he made at an event celebrating International Women’s Day 2024 held in Colombo on March 08.

“It is imperative that women’s rights go beyond mere rhetoric; therefore, it is crucial to enact appropriate legislation, a task that has been neglected for far too long,” Wickremesinghe said.

“In celebrating International Women’s Day, the usual practice in our country is to hold a ceremony, discuss women’s rights and return home. This routine occurs every year. However, this time, we have decided to implement concrete actions to amplify women’s voices,” he said.

“Plans are also underway to establish a Gender Equality Council with ministerial powers and to set up a gender centre, equipped to address issues at the ministerial level.

“With the implementation of these initiatives, we will establish two robust institutions dedicated to advancing women’s rights,” said Wickremesinghe. (Colombo/Mar12/2024)