Union Bank appoints Dilshan Rodrigo as Chief Executive Officer

Union Bank announced the appointment of Dilshan Rodrigo as its new Director/Chief Executive Officer, effective 16 August 2024. With an impressive career spanning over two decades in the banking sector, Rodrigo’s appointment signifies a transformative moment for the bank. Under his leadership, Union Bank aims to navigate the evolving landscape of Sri Lanka’s banking industry and become a beacon of innovation and customer-centric strategies in an era of digitalization.

Rodrigo stated that “Union Bank is committed to being at the forefront of banking innovation and service excellence. Our focus will be on harnessing our capital strength to drive growth and expand our footprint, particularly in the retail and SME sectors. We will capitalize on our well-located branches across Sri Lanka to target key areas for development and transform our digital capabilities to better serve our customers. Union Bank will also foster sustainable entrepreneurship through the Union Bank School of Social Entrepreneurship (UBSSE). The Bank’s strategic priorities will be aligned to the vision of CG Corp Global group, Union Bank’s main shareholder, led by Nepalese billionaire Dr. Binod Chaudhary. He further added that the recent stabilization of Sri Lanka’s economy offers a favourable environment for Union Bank to achieve its growth targets and emphasized the importance of leveraging past experiences to strengthen the production economy, drive value-added exports, and attract foreign direct investment “

Welcoming Rodrigo as the new Director/Chief Executive Officer of Union Bank, Chairman Nirvana Chaudhary expressed his confidence in the appointment, stating, “Dilshan’s extensive experience and dedication to digital transformation perfectly align with our vision to elevate Union Bank into Sri Lanka’s top five banks within the next 3-5 years. His leadership will be pivotal in driving shareholder value and accomplishing our strategic goals.”

British Council unveils research on transnational education in Sri Lanka

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.