Time for global north to walk the talk, Sri Lanka official tells World Economic Forum

ECONOMYNEXT — The global north must “walk the talk” and collaborate with the global south in ensuring access to low-cost funding, debt relief and bridging the digital divide, Sri Lanka foreign minister Ali Sabry told the World Economic Forum.

“Countries in the global south need the support of the global north on having access to low cost funding, debt relief, transition of latest technology, the digital divide. So I think this is time for the global north to walk the talk and collaborate,” he said.

Sabry was speaking at a panel on ‘North to South, East to West: Rebuilding Trust’ at the Special Meeting on Global Collaboration, Growth and Energy for Development 2024.

The minster tweeted that, during the discussion, he had noted that peace and stability lead to development and prosperity and competing powers must keep the channels of communication open.

“Peace and stability is very important. As a result of which, as you pointed out, though economies or GDPs have grown eight times despite the challenges, a precondition was peace and stability. So as we, members of the global south, would like and request members of the global north and the players who have so much power — with great power comes great responsibility — don’t close the channels of diplomacy. Open channels of communication,” he said.

High Representative of the EU for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy/Vice-President of the European Commission Josep Borrell Fontelles who spoke on the same panel also called for increased cooperation.

“We need more cooperation. Climate, demography, technology, everything needs more cooperation,” he said.

The world has to start respecting the existing rules and amend those to suit modern needs, said Fontelles.

“We don’t have to re-invent the wheel. Many things could work, the way they are. Why they don’t work is because there’s a big gap in what we say and what we do,” he said. (Colombo/Apr29/2024)