Eye-openers on reading and education disseminated at BCIS

Intellectual curiosity is the key to knowledge and wisdom and without an undying thirst for reading, which triggers such an urge, these invaluable personal assets could never be acquired. This thought provoking message was conveyed to nearly a hundred local primary and secondary students who were visitors to the Bandaranaike Centre for International Studies (BCIS), Colombo on October 25th by Senior Lecturer, Sri Jayewardenepura University, Dr. Madhubashini Disanayake Ratnayake.

Dr. Disanayake Ratnayake was speaking on the subject: ‘The Role of Reading in Shaping Futures in an Interconnected World.’

The event was launched, in view of National Reading Month, by the BCIS, which is celebrating the 50th year of its founding this year. Besides imparting to the students the value of the reading habit, the BCIS also intended to introduce the students to its well-equipped library, which is an invaluable resource base for those desirous of seeking a well-rounded education. For those in pursuit of cutting-edge knowledge in particularly International Relations, the BCIS Library is a veritable ‘must-go-to’ institution.

The relevant programs were conducted by the BCIS staff under the guidance of the institution’s Executive Director, Ms. Priyanthi Fernando.

The students were taken on a tour of the BCIS Library and other knowledge resources of the institution with the aim of stimulating in them the reading habit and a zest for knowledge-seeking. Such projects couldn’t have come at a better time than the present when local education at school level in particular is mainly examination-oriented.

The following are some key ‘take-away’ points, Dr. Madhubashini presented to her young audience: ‘Although exams are important, they are by no means the end-all and be-all of education. Being well-read, on the other hand, opens the door to in-depth and wide-ranging knowledge which will lead to the intellectual self-sufficiency of any individual, young or old.

‘Acquiring knowledge through continuous reading is, accordingly, a life-long process. It leads to knowledge empowerment even in one’s old age and the acquiring of ‘paper qualifications’ is not essential at the end of this process.

‘It is important to read whenever there is a possibility to do so. Reading even half a page of a literary work per day that proves enjoyable will serve the cause of one’s literacy. This points to the importance of time-management.

‘Acquiring membership of the country’s important libraries, including the National Library and its branches, will prove a great fillip in this process of educational empowerment.’

President, Sri Lanka Library Association and Librarian /Registrar, CFPS Law School, Dr. Preethi Liyanage, who also addressed the students was equally emphatic about the need for enthusiastic and continuous reading. The branches of the National Library which are spread far and wide in Sri Lanka are a boon that should be tapped effectively he pointed out.

Dr. Liyanage stressed the following: ‘Acquiring membership of the town branch of the National Library is a most inexpensive process. The annual fee that should be paid by a student is very nominal and it is not compulsory that a student be a resident of the Colombo District to be a member of the ‘Colombo Public Library’ any longer. Anyone from anywhere in the island is eligible to be a member of the ‘parent library’.

‘Literacy and knowledge is not a matter of acquiring high-sounding formal qualifications. Literary greats of Sri Lanka of yesteryear, such as Martin Wickremesinghe and G.B. Senanayake, could not boast of long primary and secondary school careers. However, they were avid readers who made good use of the country’s libraries. Their knowledge and literary greatness derived entirely from their undying reading habit.

‘Next time you wish to give someone a present, don’t give him or her a cake or sweetmeats which only invite illness. Present them with a valuable book instead.’

Sri Lanka wins ‘Best Stand for Doing Business’ award at WTM 2024

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.