MMCA Sri Lanka launches ‘Second Volume’

The Museum of Modern and Contemporary Art Sri Lanka (MMCA Sri Lanka) announces the launch of its first research publication ‘Second Volume: The Watapuluwa Housing Scheme by Minnette De Silva’. Edited by Sharmini Pereira and Kaumadi Jayaweera, the publication explores the groundbreaking work of architect Minnette De Silva (1918–1998) within the context of the Watapuluwa Housing Scheme, Kandy (1958).

‘Second Volume’ accompanies the MMCA Sri Lanka’s current exhibition ‘88 Acres: The Watapuluwa Housing Scheme by Minnette De Silva’, offering readers unparalleled access to primary research and previously unpublished archival materials. Among the highlights of this publication is a transcript of the animated documentary ‘is this an architectural documentary?’ (2023) by contemporary artists Irushi Tennekoon, Sumedha Kelegama, and Sumudu Athukorala, which provides valuable insights into De Silva’s visionary approach.

The publication is priced at LKR 15,000 and features a specially commissioned essay by Pereira. It is complemented by measured drawings of De Silva’s five house typologies for the Watapuluwa Housing Scheme, skillfully crafted by architects Kelegama and Athukorala. A special supplement of De Silva’s seminal essay ‘Experiments in Modern Regional Architecture in Ceylon 1950 to 1960’ (1965–1966) adds depth and historical context to this research endeavour.

In line with De Silva’s ethos of sustainability and local engagement, ‘Second Volume’ is printed on locally available paper stock, minimising environmental impact and honouring her legacy of resourcefulness. Additionally, the publication extends De Silva’s archival efforts by following her posthumously published autobiography ‘The Life and Work of an Asian Woman Architect Vol. 1’ (1998). Along with the book, the MMCA Sri Lanka has created notebooks from the paper off-cuts of the book-printing process, which come in three different paper qualities—uncoated art paper, offset paper, and coated art paper—sold in a set of three at LKR 2,000 or as a single notebook at LKR 800.

Designed by Bangalore-based Nia Thandapani and printed by Gunaratne Offset Ltd. in Sri Lanka, ‘Second Volume’ exemplifies MMCA Sri Lanka’s commitment to education and cultural preservation. Proceeds from the sale of the publication and associated notebooks will support ongoing research on De Silva’s work, and public programming at the MMCA Sri Lanka. ‘Second Volume: The Watapuluwa Housing Scheme by Minnette De Silva’ is now available for purchase at the MMCA Sri Lanka, and through their Facebook at facebook.com/mmcasrilanka and Instagram at instagram.com/mmcasrilanka/.

The Event Management Association: Enhancing professional standards and setting industry benchmarks

Commercial Bank offers attractive home loan packages for John Keells Properties’ latest project – ‘VIMAN’ Ja-Ela

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.