JVP beefs up ties with India’s BJP as Tilvin leads delegation

Colombo, Sep. 29 (Daily Mirror) - A delegation of Sri Lanka's ruling Janatha Vimukthi Peramuna (JVP), led by General Secretary Tilvin Silva, currently visiting India at the invitation of the ruling Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP), witnessed the Change of Guard, Next-of-Kin (NoK) and Retreat ceremonies at the National War Memorial in New Delhi.

The ceremonies formed part of the delegation's programme during its visit, providing an opportunity for the JVP representatives to witness India's military traditions and the country's commemoration of fallen armed-forces personnel. The National War Memorial conducts a regular Retreat Drill before sunset, while the Change of Guard ceremony and band display are held before the Retreat Drill on Sundays. The memorial also conducts ceremonial functions during visits by senior dignitaries.

The Next-of-Kin ceremony is a solemn commemoration in which the next of kin of fallen members of the Indian armed forces pay homage at the memorial. The Retreat Ceremony involves the lowering of the national and service flags before sunset.

The five-member JVP delegation is visiting India from September 27 to October 1 at the invitation of the BJP. Besides Mr. Silva, the delegation comprises Central Committee member Chandrika Adikari, MP Aboobucker Athambawa, District Committee member Kabilan Suntharamoorthy and International Department member Kalpana Madhubhashini.

During the visit, the delegation is scheduled to meet BJP National President Nitin Nabin, National General Secretary (Organisation) B. L. Santhosh and other senior BJP leaders. The programme also includes meetings with External Affairs Minister Dr. S. Jaishankar and Delhi Chief Minister Rekha Gupta, as well as interactions with various BJP Morchas and departments at the party headquarters and visits to the Parliament of India and the Delhi BJP State Office.

According to BJP Foreign Affairs Department in-charge Vijay Chauthaiwale, the visit is intended to strengthen BJP-JVP engagement, facilitate an exchange of organisational experiences and further deepen ties between the two political parties.