Dialog unveils Home Broadband plans for social media enthusiasts’ dynamic needs

Dialog Axiata PLC, Sri Lanka’s #1 connectivity provider, announced the launch of new prepaid Home Wi-Fi plans designed to meet the evolving needs of today’s customers, addressing the surge in social media usage, while extending unmatched affordability and accessibility.

The two feature-packed Home Wi-Fi YouTube & Home Wi-Fi Social Prepaid Plans cater to diverse preferences, where for just Rs. 760, users can enjoy 40GB of anytime data where 20GB is exclusively for Tik-Tok, Instagram and Facebook with an additional 20GB data for any internet use. Meanwhile, the Rs. 860 plan offers 50GB anytime data where 30GB is exclusively for YouTube usage with additional 20GB for any internet use. Customer may use these specified data quotas during any time of the day without time-bound restriction, making the internet journey a seamless experience.

Positioned as the market’s most cost-effective choices, these plans serve as all-in-one solutions for Home Wi-Fi Prepaid customers, without the hassle of multiple reloads, ensuring abundant data for popular social media platforms such as YouTube, Facebook, Instagram and Tik-Tok. These new data plans have been devised to cater to Home Wi-Fi users’ varying internet needs, emphasizing Dialog’s commitment to meeting the unique requirements of its diverse customer base.

Dialog Home Broadband Home Wi-Fi prepaid customers can now activate the plan of their choosing from the newly introduced plans by simply reloading the value of the plan at any Dialog retailer island wide or via the MyDialog App.

More information on Dialog’s Home Broadband Home Wi-Fi Prepaid plans can be accessed via – www.dialog.lk

Dialog Axiata Unveils Smart Home Devices Powered by Dialog Smart Home App

Dialog and Samsung Launch Highly Anticipated Samsung Galaxy S24 Series

Dialog and Samsung launch highly anticipated Samsung Galaxy S24 series

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.