DFCC Bank supports Sri Lanka Tamil Women’s Union’s celebration of International Women’s Day

DFCC Pinnacle and DFCC Aloka, the highest-tier premium banking experience and the exclusively women-centric banking proposition from DFCC Bank, respectively, recently supported the Sri Lanka Tamil Women’s Union as the association celebrated International Women’s Day 2024.

A spirited celebration of empowerment and solidarity, the event was an inspiring occasion that resonated with women from all sections of society. It not only celebrated the remarkable achievements of women but also served as a rallying call for furthering the cause of gender equality and #InspiringInclusion.

Discussing the partnership, Shera Hassen, Vice President and Head of DFCC Pinnacle and Branch Banking Planning & Implementation at DFCC Bank said, “It has been an honour to support the Sri Lanka Tamil Women’s Union in their celebration of Women’s Day and their efforts towards advocating for women’s empowerment in Sri Lanka. As a bank that realizes the unique roles and perspectives that women bring to the table, we are heavily focused on supporting women through our banking propositions, such as DFCC Aloka, which is a comprehensive financial solution exclusively for women. We take this opportunity to honour every woman working to reach her full potential and look forward to continuing to empower women in Sri Lanka through financial inclusion.”

The event encompassed insightful panel discussions, interactive workshops, and motivational talks by eminent personalities, inspiring women to strive for excellence across various spheres. The keynote speakers underscored the significance of education, financial independence, and dismantling social barriers to attain genuine empowerment.

Decline in three-month TB rate and State Minister’s comments bring CSE to life

IIHS-DFCC partnership to provide loans for students pursuing health education

Chief Internal Auditor’s Forum of Banks appoints new committee for 2023/24

DFCC Leasing and Ideal Motors join forces to offer leasing promotions

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.