‘Turn your passion for technology into a globally recognised career’

Admissions now open for the 2026 intake at SLT-MOBITEL Nebula Institute of Technology

SLT-MOBITEL Nebula Institute of Technology, the educational arm of SLT-MOBITEL, is now accepting applications for the 2026 intake, inviting ambitious innovators to dream boldly, discover their potential, and engineer a future that matters by pursuing world-recognized qualifications.

For students passionate about driving innovation and building careers to shape the future, SLT-MOBITEL Nebula Institute of Technology offers recognized qualifications, hands-on experience, and vital industry connections guaranteeing success.

As Sri Lanka’s premier destination for future-ready education, the institute equips learners with cutting-edge knowledge in engineering, IT, robotics, data science and emerging technologies, delivered through state-of-the-art facilities and industry-aligned curricula.

With access to modern labs, advanced simulation tools, and mandatory industrial training bridging theory with practice, supported by strong employer partnerships that open doors to international opportunities, SLT-MOBITEL Nebula Institute of Technology graduates are job‑ready from day one and equipped to thrive in today’s rapidly evolving world.

Offering world-class education through local access, the SLT-MOBITEL Nebula Institute of Technology is recognized by the University Grants Commission (UGC). The institute has partnered world-ranked institutions including the University of Hertfordshire (UK) and Pearson BTEC, with programmes that meet international standards and address Sri Lanka’s growing demand for tech talent.

Powering careers, students can pursue qualifications in high-demand fields including, Electrical & Electronic Engineering, Robotics and Artificial Intelligence, Data Science, Digital Technologies and Computing and Business. With flexible pathways including top-up degrees, HNDs, and foundation diplomas available, SLT-MOBITEL Nebula Institute of Technology caters to students, school leavers, career changers, and aspiring tech professionals.

The programmes offered for the 2026 intake include the BEng Honours in Electrical & Electronic Engineering, University of Hertfordshire, UK, BEng Honours in Robotics & Artificial Intelligence, University of Hertfordshire, UK, BSc Honours in Data Science, University of Hertfordshire, UK, Pearson BTEC Level 5 HND in Electrical & Electronic Engineering, Pearson BTEC Level 5 HND in Digital Technologies, Pearson BTEC Level 5 HND in Computing, Pearson BTEC Level 3 Foundation Diploma in Engineering, Certificate in Applied Information Technology (CAIT) and Top-up Degree Programs.

Investing in future potential, the institute offers up to 30% scholarships based on A/L results, plus a 20% scholarship for postgraduate studies at the University of Hertfordshire upon completion of a bachelor’s degree.

At SLT‑MOBITEL Nebula Institute of Technology, parents and students are assured of academic excellence, practical exposure, and professional confidence. The institute also offers international‑standard learning opportunities at an affordable investment, preparing graduates to thrive in today’s rapidly evolving digital environment.

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.