When economic reality mellows militarism

US President Donald Trump has revealed what really compelled him to agree to stop the Iran war. After signing an interim peace agreement with Iran, on Wednesday, he defended his deal with Tehran, telling the media that he wanted to avoid an “economic catastrophe” that could have resulted if the Iran conflict had continued. Tycoons like Trump are known to prioritise economics over everything else, but reflected in his thinking is an emerging security paradigm in the modern world. Military might alone no longer determines the outcome of an armed conflict; economic factors also play a significant role in shaping it.

Washington may have ignored the adverse impact of its Iran war if the US had been free from knock-on economic effects. But oil prices went up sharply in the US, and disruptions to about 30% of global fertiliser supplies due to the closure of the Hormuz Strait prompted American farmers’ associations to issue dire warnings of possible food price increases and shortages. Securing the sinews of war was no walk in the park for Trump. The Pentagon informed the House Armed Services Committee, a few weeks ago, that the US had spent USD 25 billion on the Iran war by that time. But Democratic leaders and several leading economists believe that the actual cost of the conflict to the US economy could be between USD 630 billion and USD 1 trillion, according to an Al Jazeera  report.

What one gathers from the trajectory of the Iran conflict is that having control over a strategic oil chokepoint could prove as effective as the so-called nuclear deterrent in an asymmetrical conflict. Iran may have failed to achieve its goal of enriching uranium to the extent of being able to realise its nuclear dream, but it succeeded in using the Hormuz Strait as a strategic lever to shift the conflict to the economic front. The US naval blockade aimed at coercing Iran into submission did not yield the desired results. Washington underestimated Iran’s military capability and resilience, and had to lift sanctions on Russian oil in a bid to calm the volatile world oil market, but without much success. Not even the release of global strategic oil reserves could help stabilise petroleum prices.

The reaction of the world oil market to the signing of the US-Iran peace agreement was immediate. Brent crude futures dropped to USD 77.96 a barrel while WTI fell to USD 74.96 a barrel, much to the relief of economies around the world. Stocks rallied amidst falling oil prices. One can only hope that the US-Iran peace agreement will reach fruition, with all stakeholders making a serious effort to ensure its success.

Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu has not taken kindly to the US-Iran peace deal. In February, he declared the Iran war a dream come true for him. He said he had been dreaming of attacking Iran for 40 years. The unexpected end to the conflict has shattered his political dream. He was obviously relying on attacks on Iran to shore up his electoral chances ahead of the parliamentary polls scheduled for October 2026. The upcoming Knesset election has been described in some quarters as one of the most contentious electoral contests in Israel’s recent history, as it is the first national election to take place since the “October 7 attacks” followed by Israel’s war with Hamas and Hezbollah and the Iran war. Netanyahu is also standing trial in three separate corruption cases, facing charges of bribery, fraud, and breach of trust. He has denied any wrongdoing. His ongoing trial has been delayed due to his security and diplomatic schedule.

Meanwhile, sharp oil price drops will surely benefit Sri Lanka, but they are bound to throw up new challenges. The JVP-NPP government is coming under increasing pressure to bring oil prices down and do away with the QR-based fuel rationing system. If it gives in, low prices and unrestricted sales will lead to steep increases in fuel consumption and the national oil import bill, which has jumped more than fivefold from USD 98 million in February 2026 to USD 522 million in May, according to President Anura Kumara Disanayake. How the government proposes to navigate this sensitive politico-economic issue remains to be seen.

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.