FCID’s big catch

The Financial Crimes Investigation Division (FCID) has uncovered a large-scale foreign exchange fraud and arrested a Colombo-based businessman who is reported to have transferred millions of US dollars out of the country through a large number of shell companies since 2023. He has been allegedly involved in money laundering and illegal transfer of funds for phantom imports, according to media reports. The FCID deserves praise for its successful raid, but there is reason to believe that it is only scratching the surface of the problem. Much more needs to be done.

There are many other foreign currency racketeers who deprive Sri Lanka’s banking system of a colossal amount of dollars annually through various illegal operations. Among them are many exporters. Public Security Minister Ananda Wijepala told Parliament about two weeks ago that investigations had revealed that a large number of import-export entities operated only for short periods of around six months. He said the Customs had identified 105 local companies operating 227 accounts in 13 banks, with funds transferred overseas on 26,108 occasions between 01 January, 2023 and 30 September, 2025, for phantom imports. Besides, there are many businessmen who park most of their export proceeds overseas and resort to unlawful practices, such as misinvoicing, to mislead the Customs.

Informal fund transfer systems like hawala and undiyal have thrived under successive governments due to better exchange rates offered by them, faster transfers, virtual absence of documentation and, most of all, secrecy. They facilitate unregulated forex flows with impunity, much to the detriment of the economy. It has been reported that many expatriate Sri Lankan workers use these informal channels to transfer funds.

The country gains only when migrant workers send remittances through official channels, for foreign currency enters the banking system; the Central Bank can accumulate reserves, and remittance inflows appear in official balance-of-payments statistics. When remittances are diverted through hawala or undiyal networks, foreign exchange bypasses the banking system, distorting balance-of-payments data, reducing official reserve accumulation and making the Central Bank lose regulatory oversight on foreign currency flows. These informal fund transfer systems not only take their toll on the country’s foreign currency reserves but also pose a threat to national security as they are used for funding illegal activities including terrorism. Curiously, there has been no all-out effort to neutralise these networks.

One may recall that when the first signs of a foreign currency crisis appeared in 2021, the media raised the issue of unregulated forex flows through informal fund transfer systems with the then government leaders, who sought to make light of the situation, claiming that there was no need for action against such operations. A few months later, the country was left with no forex even for essential imports, and those leaders had to outrun protesters. The present-day leaders are likely to face a similar fate unless illegal fund transfer operations are disrupted and everything possible is done to build foreign currency reserves. which are under tremendous pressure.

There is a pressing need for stronger laws to deal with foreign currency racketeers. The abolition of the Exchange Control Act of 1953 and the introduction of the Foreign Exchange Act of 2017 during the UNP-led  Yahapalana government have stood foreign currency racketeers in good stead, as we pointed out in a previous editorial comment. The Exchange Control Act was the primary legislative framework governing foreign currency, gold, securities, and cross-border financial transactions in Sri Lanka. The Foreign Exchange Act introduced under the pretext of liberalising the foreign currency flow converted non-bailable criminal offences into civil offences. The incumbent government should seriously consider restoring the Exchange Control Act if it is to deal with racketeers effectively and shore up foreign currency reserves.

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.