ADB steps up to support accountant entrepreneur in her own venture

The Island Financial Review recently met with Chamini Dinusha, a risk-taking female who quit her job as an accountant and deployed her business accounting acumen into her own venture.

Chamini told us that she wanted to harness her full entrepreneurship potential to make the best out of her growth mindset.

“I didn’t want to let others tell me what I could do or couldn’t do. I knew which stage I was in, and which stage I wanted to be in. At the time, maybe I only saw the upside and didn’t know the challenges I would face. In fact, it was a time my energy was high, and my fear was low, so I quit my job and set up Aqua Ceylon International (Pvt) Ltd., the exotic tropical fish exporting company in Pannala in 2019. The economic conditions in the country were favourable for an export-oriented startup at the time, but things began to turn bleak with the outbreak of the Covid-19 pandemic and the economic crisis that followed. I knew I couldn’t succeed on my own in such circumstances because ornamental fish exporting is a competitive business on a global scale. So, I decided to bring in Lakshitha Jayasinghe as CEO of the company who has a lot of international experience in this industry. He has been a great asset to this company since he joined in March 2021. I can’t imagine how Lakshitha, I and our workforce of 20 personnel were able to navigate through the pandemic period, the economic crisis and keep our operations running without being compelled to close the business. The main challenge we faced during the pandemic was the non-existence of storage facilities in our premises to keep our fish under proper quarantine conditions as well as the lack of air transport for perishable cargo which includes our product. We knew we had to have enough storage facilities to stock enough ornamental fish and be prepared for the pent-up demand in overseas markets as the air-transport sector was slowly recovering post-covid.”

“This was the critical time we were desperately looking for a financial scheme to support our business – a scheme that will truly support the business without looking to gain from it in an unethical way. As luck would have it, I got to know from the Seylan Bank branch in Gampaha about the Asian Development Bank’s (ADB) loan facilities for small and medium enterprises (SMEs) which were dedicated to supporting SMEs hit by disruptions in production due to Covid-19. I was able to obtain a loan of more than Rs. 4.7 million through this project. We invested the whole of these funds in building 170 cement tanks to meet our imminent need for storage of exotic fish. Our earlier practice of storing fish in polythene bags was no longer necessary. Our earlier practice of limited purchases from our suppliers was no longer necessary, and our earlier practice of accepting only small export orders was no longer necessary. Today we take up bigger inward orders without any fear or hesitation and deliver it on time. As a result, Aqua Ceylon’s current monthly revenue averages at USD 100,000. ADB’s financial assistance was a key contributory factor in this achievement,” a grateful Dinusha said.

In 2022, the top exporters of Ornamental ish   were Indonesia ($44.6M), Singapore ($38.2M), Japan ($37.6M), Netherlands ($25.8M)and Sri Lanka ($23.3M).

In 2022, the top importers of Ornamental Fish were United tates ($66.9M), China ($27.9M), Germany ($21.9M), United Kingdom ($20.5M), and France ($18.6M).

SLT-MOBITEL Enterprise and .lk to boost micro and SME sector

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.