University of Sri Jayewardenepura publishes international case study on Port City Colombo’s role in Sri Lanka’s economic transformation

The Faculty of Management Studies and Commerce, University of Sri Jayewardenepura, in collaboration with Port City Colombo, has co-authored and internationally published an academic case study and accompanying teaching notes for students, examining the project’s potential role in shaping Sri Lanka’s long-term economic future.

Published by Nova Publishers, New York, USA, the study titled “Port City Colombo: Catalysing Sri Lanka’s Emergence as a Global Investment Hub” provides a multidisciplinary analysis of the project’s urban planning, strategic, economic, regulatory, and sustainability dimensions. The case study is featured as a chapter in the book, “Is Sri Lanka Revitalising its Economy? An Analysis of Economic Policy and Technological Adoption,” edited by S. Perera, N. Nanayakkara, G. Samarakoon, and S. Bamunusinghe, and published under the 21st International Conference on Business Management (ICBM), the flagship conference of the Faculty of Management Studies and Commerce.

The case study explores the transformational vision of Port City Colombo as a landmark urban development and Special Economic Zone designed to support Sri Lanka’s transition from a traditional tourism-and export-dependent economy to a dynamic, service-oriented, and globally competitive investment destination. Against a backdrop of shifting global economic dynamics and increasing competition for foreign direct investment, the study examines how Port City Colombo seeks to create an enabling environment for investment, innovation, and ease of doing business while contributing to Sri Lanka’s long-term economic resilience, diversification, and integration into the global economy.

ADB approves financing to boost clean energy access in Sri Lanka

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.