After IPO, Sri Lanka’s Cable Solutions looks to expand US operations

ECONOMYNEXT – Cable Solutions Limited, a subsidiary of Sri Lanka’s ACL Cables Plc, said it was looking to supply cables to the US operations of a multinational company.

“Our commitment to obtaining international certifications has opened doors to new markets and attracted more discerning customers. For instance, we have begun supplying cables to the UK and potentially the US operations of a multinational company,” Chairman Suren Madanayake told shareholders.

Previously, the company’s products were only available through its Indian plant, he said in the company’s first annual report as a listed company, presenting audited financial statements for the fiscal year ending 2023/2024.

Sri Lanka’s Cable Solutions begins trading on CSE Diri Savi Board

The company made a gross profit of 761,562,327 million for 2023/2024, lower than the 1,084,425,516 in 2022/2023.

“The global economic environment also plays a role in shaping the outlook for cable manufacturing. While global demand for cables is influenced by infrastructure investments and technological advancements, macroeconomic uncertainties and geopolitical tensions cause fluctuations in raw material prices and predictability which impact margins and production costs.”

Addressing persistent issues within the manufacturing sector will be key to fostering a robust recovery, Madanayake said.

“Focused strategies, including optimizing supply chains, enhancing operational efficiencies and leveraging technological advancements, will be essential for achieving sustainable growth.”

The company said it had invested in new machinery to enhance efficiency, quality, and to address production bottlenecks: “The introduction of the 80-50 extrusion line marks a significant upgrade from its predecessor enabling faster out-put and enhanced production efficiency.

“Additionally, the new machine’s lower power consumption will contribute to considerable energy cost savings.

“Looking ahead, we anticipate further new customer acquisitions, supported by a strong pipeline of advanced R&D discussions and recent marketing leads.

“The benefits from large accounts acquired in FY22 and FY23 will be more fully realized in FY25 and beyond.”

Although its India operation had made a loss, the company continues to explore opportunities for product diversification, Madanayake said.

While continuing to maintain a significant revenue share from export customers, Cable Solutions will intensify focus on Europe and the US, alongside expanding marketing efforts in India, Australia, and other targeted regions and in the Renewable Energy space, in particular, Sri Lanka.

The momentum for scaling up the business is gaining strength, it said. (Colombo/Sep16/2024)