Suspect wanted over Mahabage shooting killed in shootout with STF

A former army soldier wanted in connection with the recent shooting incident in Mahabage and was also wanted for several other crimes, has been shot dead by STF personnel during an exchange of fire at Sooriyawewa this morning (Feb.28), police said.

He is suspected to be the motorcycle rider in the shooting which took place on Feb. 21 near a meat shop in Elapitiwala Junction, Mahabage that killed the shop owner.

A special raid was launched in the early hours of the day after the STF received intelligence information revealing the suspect’s hideout in the vicinity of Andigama Tank in Sooriyawewa. As the STF officers approached, the 45-year-old had opened fire, forcing them to retaliate.

In the shootout, one STF officer and the suspect were wounded but the latter succumbed to injuries shortly after being rushed to the Sooriyawewa Hospital.

He was identified as a resident of the Kanumuldeniya area in Mee-Ella. The STF has seized a revolver and a motorcycle from the possession of the deceased.

As per reports, the suspect was also implicated in the June 2023 murder attempt on former Rathgama Pradeshiya Sabha member Dulaj Tharanga, a brother-in-law of the infamous drug dealer “Rathgama Vidura”  that happened near the Seenigama Devalaya in Hikkaduwa.

On Feb.21, three unidentified assailants had opened fire using a revolver, at around 7:15 a.m. The victim had succumbed to injuries while being rushed to the Colombo North Teaching Hospital in Ragama.

The deceased, identified as Hettiarachchige Don Sujith alias “Ukkuwa”, was the brother-in-law of the criminal gang leader “Welle Saranga” and a resident of North Batagama in Ja-Ela.

Two suspects including an army officer had been arrested in connection with the murder thus far.

A rival gang led by “Dubai Nipuna” was under suspicion of orchestrating the murder. Reports also revealed that Sujith had been receiving death threats from “Dubai Nipuna’s” gang.

The prime suspect or the gunman, who was serving as a Corporal attached to the 4th Battalion of the Gemunu Watch Regiment at the Army camp in Chenkalady of Batticaloa, was arrested on February 24 while on the run.

He had fled the camp when the Army intelligence officers were approaching but was later taken into custody in the Ampara area following an extensive search operation.

The second suspect was arrested in Narawelpiya South, Hakmana on the same day for aiding and abetting in the killing. As per reports, this suspect had deserted the Army in 2009 while following the basic training program and had later been officially discharged.