Misplaced sense of victory?

Speculation was rife in some quarters, following the recent arrest of runaway criminal suspect, Ishara Sewwandi, in Nepal, where she fled via India in February after the murder of Ganemulla Sanjeewa, that an electricity tariff hike would coincide with a media circus over her extradition to Sri Lanka. Sri Lankan governments are notorious for timing tax and tariff hikes for such events. Time was when fuel price increases were announced while the country was celebrating wins in international cricket matches.

The Public Utilities Commission of Sri Lanka (PUCSL), cannot be considered so independent and bold as to defy the ruling party in defending the rights of electricity consumers, but it has rejected the CEB’s (read the government’s) request for a 6.8% electricity tariff hike. So, the existing power tariffs will remain unchanged until the end of this year.

All those who opposed the proposed power tariff hike are on cloud nine, claiming victory and thanking the PUCSL profusely. The Opposition is prominent among them. It is said that victory has a thousand fathers, but defeat is an orphan. There are many others who claim to have frustrated the government’s efforts to jack up electricity tariffs.

Can the PUCSL’s decision against the proposed upward electricity tariff revision be considered a victory for the Opposition as well as others who opposed it? It was an electricity tariff reduction that they initially demanded, claiming that the CEB had been earning huge profits thanks to an increase in hydro power generation, previous tariff hikes, etc. They asked the government to fulfil its election promise of a 30% power tariff cut. They also faulted the CEB for having asked for another tariff increase, but subsequently they stopped pressuring the government to lower the electricity prices and embarked on a campaign to scuttle the proposed tariff hike.

It is now clear from the PUCSL’s reasoning that there was no basis whatsoever for a power tariff increase, and the CEB could not have been unaware of that fact. If so, why did it seek a tariff increase?

The Opposition, the CEB trade unions and consumer rights groups insist that the government is trying to pass the cost of restructuring the CEB on to the public in the form of tariff hikes. This argument sounds tenable in that the proposed voluntary retirement scheme for the CEB workers in view of the restructuring programme is going to cost the state coffers billions of rupees. The government failed to secure an electricity tariff hike, but it arguably succeeded in shifting the focus of the Opposition and others from a tariff reduction to preventing a tariff increase.

The unrevised power tariffs will be valid only until the year end, which is two and a half months away. The government has amply demonstrated that it knows more than one way to shoe a horse. It antagonised the CEB workers, but now there is an uneasy truce between them.It is wary of doing anything that is likely to provoke the CEB workers and the public at this juncture. Has the government made a tactical retreat, where the power tariffs are concerned? Will there be a bigger power tariff hike early next year than the one the government has failed to secure? There is no way the government can allow the power tariffs to remain unchanged or put the process of restructuring the CEB on hold, with the IMF breathing down its neck.

It is obvious that the government is determined to increase power tariffs to fulfil what is believed to be one of the conditions for unlocking the next tranche of the IMF loan. We will have to wait until the next power hike revision to see who has actually won. The next two months or so when the electricity tariffs will remain unchanged can be considered what Sri Lankans call ‘an interval in hell’.

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.