Nestlé partners ALFT to pave way for sustainable future in flexible packaging

ALFT Packaging welcomes Nestlé Lanka Managing Director Bernhard Stefan (fifth from left) and senior delegates during their visit, alongside ALFT Chairman Lakshman De Fonseka (fourth from left), MD Chathura Jayatissa (sixth from left), and COO Tissa Gunaratne (third from left)

ALFT Packaging, a pioneering manufacturer of flexible packaging solutions in Sri Lanka, hosted a senior delegation from Nestlé Lanka, led by Managing Director Bernhard Stefan, offering an exclusive tour of its state-of-the-art facility and showcasing the range of industry-leading, world-class flexible packaging solutions.

The visit highlighted the growing partnership between the two companies and demonstrated ALFT’s commitment to innovation, sustainability, and excellence in the flexible packaging technology.

During the comprehensive facility tour, the Nestlé team gained first-hand insights into ALFT’s advanced manufacturing processes, with particular focus on food safety protocols, sustainability initiatives, and innovative flexible packaging solutions. The delegation expressed strong appreciation for ALFT’s technological capabilities and dedication to maintaining the highest standards of quality and hygiene.

Nestlé Lanka Ltd. Managing Director Bernhard Stefan said, “Food safety is our number one priority, making it absolutely critical that we have safety in our packaging materials. It is exciting to see how dynamic and flexible ALFT Packaging is, offering unique solutions for our packaging needs. We were particularly impressed with ALFT’s implementation of sustainability standards in their manufacturing processes.”

ALFT’s innovative approach to creating unique and consumer-focused flexible packaging solutions emerged as another vital aspect of the partnership, showcasing the ability to enhance the overall consumer experience. Additionally, the company’s dedicated focus on sustainability impressed the visitors, particularly initiatives in minimising manufacturing waste and developing recyclable flexible packaging materials, aligning perfectly with current environmental priorities and future industry demands.

ALFT Packaging Chairman Lakshman De Fonseka, added, “The visit by Nestlé Lanka’s senior team emphasises the strength of our partnership and mutual commitment to excellence in flexible packaging solutions. At ALFT, we are proud to demonstrate how investments in technology, sustainability, and innovation are helping global brands meet their flexible packaging needs while maintaining the highest standards of food safety and quality. We are committed to pushing boundaries in flexible packaging, positioning Sri Lanka as a hub for world-class manufacturing capabilities.”

Being the only BRC- “AA” certified flexible packaging plant in Sri Lanka, this visit reinforced ALFT’s position as a leading flexible packaging solutions provider in the region and highlights the commitment to meeting the evolving needs of global brands while maintaining the highest standards of quality and sustainability.