First Technology Incubation Centre opens at Vavuniya University

The opening of the first Technology Incubation Centre, established under the program for the establishment of Technology Incubation Centres being implemented by the Science and Technology Ministry, was held last week at the Vavuniya University Park Road premises.

Science and Technology Minister Prof. Chrishantha Abeysena and Industry and Entrepreneurship Development Minister Sunil Handunneththi officiated at the opening.

This Technology Centre aims to promote entrepreneurship, innovation, research and innovation commercialisation, and startup development in the Northern Province. This Centre is jointly established by the Science and Technology Ministry and the Vidatha Program operating under the Ministry’s purview in collaboration with the University of Vavuniya.

The Vidatha program, being a key program of the Science and Technology Ministry, envisages bringing technology to the villages. It supports the development of rural small and medium-scale enterprises through science, technology, and innovative knowledge, thereby transferring appropriate technologies to the grassroots level to promote entrepreneurship throughout Sri Lanka. As a further development of the program, Technology Incubation Centres are being established at State universities with special attention being paid to uplifting entrepreneurs, innovators, and startups. 24 Technology Incubator Centres are due to be established in this manner, covering the entire island, both within and outside State universities.

This will be a milestone initiative in developing and strengthening innovation, entrepreneurship, and small and medium-sized enterprises. It also aims to conquer local and foreign markets by improving the standard and quality of products and services.

Concurrent with the opening of the Centre, a science, technology, and innovation exhibition was held at the same premises, bringing together the country’s leading technology and research institutions, universities, and companies. The exhibition was open to the public free of charge.

In addition, 172 Young Inventors Clubs (YICs) and School Science Societies were established for schools in the Vavuniya, Mullaitivu, and Mannar Districts at the Vavuniya District Secretariat.

The Sri Lanka Inventors Commission (SLIC), operating under the Science and Technology Ministry, aiming to strengthen and promote the national innovation ecosystem has already initiated a program to establish YICs in schools with a novel approach under the guidance of Minister in charge Prof. Abeysena, with a view to fostering creativity and innovation among school students. The inaugural phase of this program for the year 2026 unfolded on Friday (23) at the Vavuniya District Secretariat.

School science clubs are also being established under the guidance of the National Science Foundation functioning under the purview of the Ministry. A number of programs will be implemented through these school science clubs to popularise science in society and to create enthusiasm in school students about the fields of science and technology, including STEM education.

Vavuniya MPs Mylvaganam Jegadeeswaran and Sellathambi Thilakanathan, Science and Technology Ministry Additional Secretary Mahesh Gammanpila, University of Vavuniya Vice-Chancellor A. Atputharaja, Government officials, university students, entrepreneurs, and a large number of participants attended the event.