Victor, the Friend of the Foreign Press

This article was written by Amal Jayasinghe, Bureau Chief of Agence France-Presse in Colombo to commemorate Ravaya Founder/Editor who’s first death anniversary fell last month.

To most Sri Lankans, Victor Ivan was an editor marked by his role in the failed 1971 JVP insurrection. To the foreign press, he was more than a revolutionary turned reporter.What many may not know is his close association with foreign correspondents and visiting journalists during one of the most turbulent periods since the 1971 JVP-led insurrection, in which he himself was involved.

When a new association for foreign journalists in Sri Lanka was formed in mid-1988, Victor was one of the first Sri Lankan editors to strongly support it. He later became an Associate Member, a category opened within the Foreign Correspondents’ Association (FCA) to those interested in the work of foreign correspondents. This was a time when international media attention was sharply focused on Sri Lanka after it signed a controversial peace pact with neighbouring India to try to end Tamil separatism, but instead ended up fighting the separatists.

More than 50 foreign media outlets — such as ABC, BBC and CBC — and international wire services including Agence France-Presse, Associated Press, Deutsche Presse-Agentur and Reuters, as well as regional newspapers such as The Hindu, The Times of India and Hindustan Times, were represented in Colombo.

At the time, the FCA held regular meetings, panel discussions and social events. This was when television talk shows were unheard of and before the World Wide Web was invented. Victor was a regular guest at the FCA and a valuable resource not only for visiting “firemen”, but also for those based in Colombo, helping them understand the story.

Apart from his role in the 1971 JVP insurrection, Victor had by 1986 started a monthly magazine that later evolved into the popular anti-establishment daily Ravaya. He had gone from revolutionary to reporter — not a rookie, but one armed with deep insights into Sri Lankan society and its movers and shakers.

I was one of the younger reporters who regularly turned to Victor to pick his brains and understand the background to political developments. He was always upfront about his political bias and never pretended to be an independent journalist. Victor told me many times that he was biased towards what he believed to be right and just. In later life, he would confess that he was not always right.

He had strongly supported Chandrika Kumaratunga’s rise to power in 1994, but soon grew disillusioned. He questioned her policies and key appointments, notably the appointment of Sarath Nanda Silva as Chief Justice in September 1999. Three days later, Ravaya took the unusual step of publishing Silva’s swearing-in ceremony upside down on its front page. Instead of black letters on a white background, the paper was reversed, with white letters on a black background. “අධිකරණ නිදහසේ මළගම” (Death of the Independence of the Judiciary) was the headline.

Victor predicted the downfall of Mahinda Rajapaksa when he amended the Constitution and sought a third term in office. “He is like a bulldozer without brakes going downhill,” Victor said when I sought his analysis of the 2015 presidential election. He understood the value of a good soundbite. Beyond politics and conflict, Victor was also my authority on Sri Lanka’s complex social structures, including the caste system and its significance in elections and governance.

Most foreign correspondents — myself included — regarded Victor as a reliable “dial-a-quote”: a trusted, knowledgeable voice who invariably enriched our stories.

The Tsunami of 2024 and what followed at the Finance Ministry and overseas

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.