India’s message couched in Misri’s diplomatese

Indian Foreign Secretary Vikram Misri, during his brief Colombo visit, has urged the Sri Lankan government to hold the long-delayed Provincial Council (PC) elections “at the earliest”, which is a courteous, professional stand-in for “soon” in diplomatese, if you like. Thus, India has begun to crank up pressure on the Dissanayake government to hold the PC elections. India has given a fillip to a campaign by some Tamil-speaking political parties to pressure the government to hold PC elections held soon. Misri has also asked President Dissanayake to “fully implement” constitutional provisions (read the 13th Amendment to the Constitution) to meet the aspirations of the Tamil people.

The irony of an Indian Foreign Secretary asking a JVP-led government to hold the PC elections expeditiously may not have been lost on keen political observers. The JVP killed thousands of people and destroyed public property worth billions of rupees in the late 1980s during its terror campaign against “Indian expansionism”, the 13th Amendment and the establishment of the PCs. It even murdered traders who sold Indian products, such as onions. Damage caused by recent riots to Negombo and Mahara prisons pales into insignificance in comparison to the widespread destruction of state assets by the JVP during its second uprising. Today, India has the JVP leaders eating out of its hand. It is India that enabled the JVP-led NPP to gain international legitimacy by extending a landmark official invitation to JVP leader Anura Kumara Dissanayake in early 2024.

The 13th Amendment is akin to a shrapnel fragment lodged close to Sri Lanka’s heart. It has been left embedded, given the complications an attempt to remove it could cause. Sri Lanka has chosen to live with it. This made-in-India constitutional amendment which provides for devolution at the provincial level, can also be described as a child born of rape; it came into being as a result of India’s rape of Sri Lanka’s sovereignty in 1987. Now that it is part of Sri Lanka’s Constitution, it has to be implemented and action taken to ensure that the PC system functions under elected representatives.

No less a person than former Chairman of the Election Commission Mahinda Deshapriya has stated that it amounts to a grave violation of the Constitution for bureaucrats to run the PCs without elected representatives. In an interview with Hiru TV recently, he stressed that all political parties had to be held accountable for the serious violation of the Constitution; there was no graver sin than postponing elections, and the PC polls had to be held fast. Some election monitoring outfits have also urged the government to conduct the PC elections soon.

All self-righteous, cantankerous politicians in both the government and the Opposition should be ashamed of themselves. They teamed up to postpone the PC polls indefinitely by amending the Provincial Council Elections Act during the UNP-led Yahapalana government in 2017. All the parties represented in Parliament at that time, including the UNP, the SLFP, the JVP, the SLMC and the ITAK/TNA, and the current SLPP leaders who were in the “Joint Opposition”, unashamedly sank their political differences and colluded to postpone the PC elections through a Christmas tree Bill, consisting of more sections incorporated thereinto at the committee stage than the original text under the pretext of increasing female representation in the PCs.

There have been five Presidents—Mahinda Rajapaksa, Maithripala Sirisena, Gotabaya Rajapaksa, Ranil Wickremesinghe and Anura Kumara Dissanayake—and four governments, led by the SLFP, the UNP, the SLPP and the NPP, respectively, since the last PC election was held in the Uva Province in 2014. Some provinces last went to the polls in 2012.

The government ought to overcome its fear of facing elections and hold the PC polls soon under the proportional representation system by amending the Provincial Council Elections Act to clear the legal barriers. After all, the NPP made a solemn pledge in its election manifesto, A Thriving Nation: A Beautiful Life, that it would hold the PC polls within one year of forming a government. It should fulfil that promise without delay. A nation cannot “thrive” and life is not “beautiful” when elections are postponed on one pretext or another .

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.