Closing shop – final duties before retiring after 37 years of service

Before I left for Paris in late November, I had made arrangements to hold the Sri Lanka Education Administrative Service interviews for promotion to Class I of the Service the moment I returned. These interviews had been held up for a number of years due to controversy and serious differences of opinion as to the determination of the seniority list of the service. The various Associations representing these officers could not agree, and some of them went to Court. Pending action in Court and due to other differences the whole process had come to a complete halt.

In the meantime, Class I of the service was almost empty of officers whilst some of them were retiring and others dying without any hope of their being considered for promotion. This affected their salaries and would have affected their pensions. This was a situation serious from the official point of view and tragic from the personal point of view. I had previously held a number of meetings with the Associations and at last and with great difficulty succeeded in arriving at a consensus.

In this, Secretaryfor Shipping and Port Development, Mr. M.N. Junaid, who had great experience in establishment matters in the course of a long stay in the Ministry of Public Administration, greatly assisted me in response to my appeal to him. Because of the backlog and because three times the number as there were vacancies had to be called for interviews, the numbers involved were very large. The Minister, after discussion, went to Cabinet and obtained its authority to constitute two Preliminary Interview Boards chaired by Additional Secretaries to weed out the obviously unsuitable and put up for final interviews before a Board to be chaired by me and two other Secretaries of Cabinet Level Ministers, only those they considered eligible for final interview.

I was well aware, that given my very heavy workload, as well as the important negotiations that I had to handle, this attempt to interview over 200 officers over a number of days and completing this job before I left the service for good would impose immense strain on me. But I did not want to leave this great burden to my successor, whoever it was going to be. In a situation, where officers were dying before promotion, on the one hand, and Class I of the service was denuded of officers on the other, I felt that I had somehow to finish this task as a final act before my departure. There was also the grave danger that the consensus that I had wrought with the various Associations with such difficulty, would break down once I left the scene and the whole issue would revert to square one.

I was by now about to leave for Paris, and feeling seriously exhausted. Therefore, I thought it would be some relief if I could hop across to London from Paris after the conference and just rest and sleep for a couple of days before I got back home to attend to winding up operations and discharging my final responsibility of finishing the interviews. The press of work was such that peace was not possible to attain when one reached Sri Lanka. There was a meeting with the President about four or five days before my departure and since in any case she would have had to approve the number of days I would be out of the country, I thought of informing her personally about taking a couple of days off in London.

The President was extraordinarily generous. When I mentioned to her that I was feeling exhausted and wished to have two days just to “rest and sleep,” she at once said “Two days are not enough, take a week off.” Then she continued, “I know what it is like Dharmasiri. The only little rest I also get is when I am out of the country.” I thanked her for her spontaneous generosity, but said that two days should be enough and that in any case, I couldn’t afford to stay longer, because I had deadlines here. To this, she insisted that two days were insufficient and said “Then at least take five days off.” I was touched by her concern. In the end, and looking at my programme, with the S.L.E.A.S. interviews and my own departure from the public service looming, I just managed a very welcome rest of two days and returned to plunge straight in to the interviews.

Chairing an interview board with the responsibility of interviewing over 200 senior officers for a limited number of posts in the Class I of a service is no easy matter. Once the structure of the interview is decided, which itself must be fair with proper balance and weightage given to all relevant factors, one cannot rush through the process. An interview cannot be conducted to suit the convenience of the interview board. One has to be fair to the candidates, put them at ease and give them a chance to talk about their achievements.

In the case of educationists the issue is further complicated by the fact that almost all appearing for the interview possessed post-graduate qualifications; some of them had written books; others had written numerous articles; some had won awards and prizes and so on. Everyone brings all these to show the interview board. Some are so heavily laden that they stagger in. Others have had to resort to the assistance of some of the office aides. Some of them bring in so much material that these have to be accommodated on two or three chairs in large heaps.

With this, the next set of problems arise. Having come abundantly stocked with material many of them forget that the interview board has to interview so many during a given session. They want to show the physical evidence of most everything they had done, although we had a written record of their activities and achievements before us. I was patient. These were our officers. I felt that it would be discourteous to curtail proceedings too much. In my view anyone interviewed should go away with the feeling that he or she received a fair hearing.

I have seen too many interview boards where the principal consideration seemed to be the time constraints and the convenience of the members of the board. Under my watch, I was not going to let this happen in education. We therefore set a number of days, including Saturdays and finally finished a few days before Christmas. I felt a sense of great relief and satisfaction only marred by the sudden death of a lady principal who had retired and who had been the principal of a leading school in the island. She had fared exceptionally well at the interview. She was knocked down by a vehicle, and died without enjoying the satisfaction that comes from the due recognition of her services, and a little enhancement of her pension.

Less than two weeks to go in the public service and induction into the private sector

By now I had less than two weeks to go in service. Strangely enough, I was not feeling any sense of loss or regret but one of relief. The government had not made any offer of any firm assignment with the exception of two telephone calls from the Foreign Secretary, Mr. Wilhelm Woutersz, which was more personal to the effect that I should now give my mind to going abroad as an Ambassador. Neither my wife nor I was interested in living in a foreign country for a number of years. What I was looking for was some assignment or assignments that did not confine me within four walls for eight hours.

Almost 37 years in prison were enough. I just was not prepared to follow office routine anymore or be bound rigorously by the clock. I had had enough of that. I also felt that given my knowledge, skills, experience and the wide range of people I knew in society, I did not have to be physically present regularly in one place or places in order to be able to function effectively and make a contribution, particularly with the availability of modern communications. I had a lifetime’s habit of keeping myself up to date in my reading on a fairly wide range of subjects, a practice I still consistently follow. Even whilst in government I had resolved so many problems, some of them difficult, over the telephone. With the great variety of communications now possible, there was no necessity for persons at my level to be regularly desk bound. I only had to be accessible.

This was my thinking, and it was on this basis that I accepted certain limited assignments in the private sector. The main features of these assignments were (1) Not full-time, in the sense of not having to be present in an office full-time; (2) No line or operational functions and no responsibilities for day to day decision making; (3) Responsibilities only for lateral advice in a staff capacity on relevant official policy issues; (4) A fair responsibility for human resource development; and (5) Assistance in trouble shooting as and when relevant and required. Some of this work was interesting and creative, particularly the human development side.

The major difference between working at senior levels in the private sector, as opposed to the public sector is that in the public sector everybody else manages your time. You don’t. In the private sector you manage your time. Nobody else does. In the public sector, the disturbance factor is consistently very high, and often the merely urgent overtakes and overwhelms the important mostly in situations where the urgent is relatively trivial.

In this kind of situation, the urgency and even the temporary importance is defined in terms of source, not substance. Almost everything, emanating from a President, a Prime Minister, a Minister, a Member of Parliament, and Parliament as a body, is deemed to be urgent, however insignificant the matter is, from the standpoint of national welfare and development and in the overall scheme of things. Therefore, one has to drop temporarily, extremely important matters that are of, or that would eventually be of great national significance in order say, to find some material for a sterile and useless political battle, in sum and substance of no value at all to the country. Therefore, if the source is important, substance is of no consequence.

Then there are the interminable meetings and conferences where much time is wasted because no system had been developed where those who had perhaps one item in a long agenda, were dealt with and sent away. One wasted so much time just waiting. The great English poet John Milton wrote in a famous poem, “They also serve who only stand and wait.” In our context, they also serve who only sit and wait. Meetings and conferences came so thick and fast that on one notable occasion I had invitations to be present at a meeting with the President, the Prime Minister, and Parliament on the same day at the same time! I chose according to the Precedence Table.

In the private sector you are free of all these. They are interested in results, not in processes or polemics. Nobody disturbs you or tells you what to do. You could always talk to people if you want to. But that is up to you. Otherwise you just do what you have to do. Nobody is really bothered as to whether you did your work in an office, in the car, at home, or over lunch or dinner at a hotel or at the sea beach. What matters is the result.

I personally found this to be greatly liberating. You could work without the stresses and tensions inherent in the public service. In fact, in my first day in a private sector office I was considerably disoriented. There were no telephone calls! The only call that I received after over three and a half hours was from the security point to the effect that my car had come! In any case, nearly 37 years of full time public sector responsibilities seems quite adequate for one lifetime.

My private sector engagements were supplemented by other part time responsibilities in the university sector, the public sector itself on a part time basis, some regional responsibilities as well as certain on going responsibilities in the broad social sector. Retirement therefore, had led to a varied range of productive work devoid of serious stress.

(Next week a round up of what I had said about the Minister and relate briefly what it was like to work with the President)

(Excerpted from In Pursuit of Governance, autobiography of MDD Pieris)

Central bank gold holdings are at a 50year high. What’s behind the jump in reserves?

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.