Tests confirm substance found in Middeniya contained chemicals used for production of ‘ICE’

Authorities have uncovered chemicals used for the production of ‘ICE’ narcotics after tests conducted by the National Dangerous Drugs Control Board (NDDCB) on the contents of the container discovered in Middeniya recently.

This was revealed after the National Dangerous Drugs Control Board submitted its report to Police on the stocks of chemicals discovered in Middeniya.

Accordingly, the report of the board revealed that 17 out of the 20 samples from Middeniya were found to contain chemicals used to produce ‘ICE’ or

On September 5, authorities uncovered a consignment of chemical substances at a residence in Thalawa, Middeniya.

These chemicals, imported for the production of ‘ICE’ in Sri Lanka, were found buried during an operation conducted by the Western North Crime Division.

The total quantity of chemicals discovered was estimated at around 50,000 kilograms.

Former Sri Lanka Podujana Peramuna (SLPP) Angunukolapelessa Pradeshiya Sabha member Piyal Manamperi was arrested in connection with the recovery of chemicals in Middeniya.

Police investigations revealed that both Piyal Manamperi and his brother were allegedly involved in concealing the chemicals and that they are close associates of notorious organized criminal ‘Kehelbaddara Padme’, who was recently arrested with several other gang members in Jakarta, Indonesia.

During the interrogation of the suspect known as ‘Backhoe Saman,’ who was also arrested in Indonesia, reportedly confessed that ‘Kehelbaddara Padme’ had imported the stock of chemicals used in the production of ‘Ice’ into the country.

The Criminal Investigation Department (CID) also uncovered that ‘Kehelbaddara Padme’ had been operating an illegal ice (methamphetamine) drug production facility in Nuwara Eliya.

This revelation emerged during interrogations conducted while the suspect, ‘Kehelbaddara Padme’, remains in CID custody.

According to information obtained through further questioning, the suspect had invested over Rs. 4 million in the operation and had rented a house in Nuwara Eliya to carry it out.

The suspect had also disclosed that approximately 2,000 kilograms of chemical substances required for the drug production had been imported into the country.