Disaster relief and dirty politics

Grama Niladharis (GNs) are up in arms, claiming that the JVP/NPP politicians and their lackeys are interfering with disaster relief programmes. Sri Lanka United Grama Niladhari Association (SLUGNA) President Nandana Ranasinghe told the media on Monday that JVP/NPP politicians and their supporters were meddling with the ongoing disaster relief operations at all levels and even obstructing the GNs. He claimed that the political authority had sent letters to the District and Divisional Secretaries, directing them to appoint ruling party members to the state-run welfare centres. SLUGNA Secretary Jagath Chandralal said state officials had been directed to obtain approval from those attached to the government’s Prajashakthi programme for carrying out relief work.

Both Ranasinghe and Chandralal are of the view that political interference with the relief distribution programme has never been so bad. The SLUGNA has warned that its members will be compelled to resort to trade union action if the government politicians did not stop interfering with their work. The GNs play a pivotal role in identifying disaster victims and ensuring that relief materials reach the target groups, and therefore the government must do everything possible to prevent them from launching a strike.

The SLUGNA’s allegations against government politicians and their supporters are very serious, and must therefore be probed immediately. No room must be left for political interference with disaster relief operations.

Complaints abound that government members are distributing relief materials collected from the public, making them out to be donations from the JVP/NPP. These complaints must also be probed.

What the JVP-led NPP government stands accused of is the very antithesis of the new political culture it promised to usher in. It pledged to depoliticise the state service and govern the country in a democratic and transparent manner, without leaving any room for corruption and political interference.

Worse, the government has been striving to have one of its loyalists appointed as Auditor General. Thankfully, the Constitutional Council has rejected three names submitted by President Anura Kumara Dissanayake for the post so far, but the government is sure to do everything in its power to achieve its objective. Why the JVP/NPP is so desperate to have one of its cronies appointed to that high post is not difficult to guess.

As for the GNs’ allegation against pro-government individuals attached to the community-level Prajashakthi outfits, one may recall that the SLFP-led United Front government (1970-77) also set up a network of committees purportedly to enable the participation of workers and ordinary citizens in governance. They were popularly known as ‘Janatha Committees’ (JCs), which subsequently became overpoliticised and mere appendages of that regime. The heads of those committees thought no end of themselves although their powers were nominal, and made a huge contribution to the downfall of the UF government.

The rule by committees, as it were, which paves the way for centralised control on the pretext of facilitating wider participation in governance, is a main feature of authoritarianism. Hitler used that method and introduced Gleichschaltung, which was a process of coordination, designed to bring all aspects of German life under Nazi control.

Hence the need to monitor the activities of all committees appointed by governments, socialist or otherwise, to further their political interests. They must not be allowed to have the state service on a string and subjugate the interests of the public to their party agendas. Eternal vigilance is said to be the price of liberty.

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.