An eventful first year

President Anura Kumara Dissanayake marks one year in office tomorrow (21). His ascension to the highest office in the land was a seismic shift in local politics. The Janatha Vimukthi Peramuna (JVP) and the National People’s Power (NPP) were always regarded as the third force in local politics, behind the United National party (UNP), the Sri Lanka Freedom Party (SLFP) and their various avatars.

But the impetus for the unprecedented political transition of the NPP from the political margins to the corridors of power was the Aragalaya (Struggle), a people’s movement that rose almost spontaneously from the acute economic crisis of 2022. The Aragalaya led to an awakening among the masses that the elite political class that ruled the country for over 75 years had engaged in corruption, nepotism and abuse of power at the expense of the public. This realization led to a massive rejection of the traditional parties and their offshoots.

In the NPP, the voters saw a political movement that was untainted by allegations of corruption and other offences. Moreover, the JVP and the NPP have over the years transformed their image to the point where they were always thought of as an ideal alternative to traditional politics. Indeed, the NPP’s Presidential candidate Anura Kumara Dissanayake campaigned mostly on an anti-corruption platform, which resonated widely with an electorate weary of entrenched sleaze in politics. When the general Election followed around two months later, the mandate given to President Dissanayake was reinforced with a two-thirds majority for the NPP in Parliament, the first time a single party had achieved that feat.

Unlike certain former Presidents who had a penchant for celebrating their “Padavi Prapthi” (Ascension to Office) anniversaries on a lavish scale (with a generous helping of the public purse), President Dissanayake will go about quietly, being the unassuming leader he always is. But a bit of introspection is called for on this occasion.

True to his word, the Government has reined in corruption and taken legal action against many prominent politicians and others at various levels of society, including a former President. The President and Ministers have also cut down on waste drastically – even the simple act of pruning the motorcades to just two vehicles will save millions of rupees in the long run. The curtailment of perks and privileges afforded to former Presidents (or their widows) is also estimated to save at least Rs. 100 million per year on housing alone.

The Government also wisely decided to go ahead with the International Monetary Fund (IMF) Extended Fund Facility (EFF) program, although it restricted the Government from implementing certain populist actions. While this may cost it politically at a future election, there really is no alternative at this point of time to the IMF programme if the country is to extricate itself from the 2022 economic downturn whose ripple effects are still being felt. The economy is rebounding due to these efforts, according to latest reports. However, the Government should strive to offer some sort of relief from the high Cost of Living for the downtrodden sections of society even within those strict parameters, a point that the IMF itself has upheld.

The Government has also been successful in restarting many of the development projects that were in limbo after 2022. Among them are the Kadawatha-Meerigama section of the Central Expressway, the second phase of the Bandaranaike International Airport expansion project, railways development and several flyovers. Much to the relief of the public, the Government also allowed the import of private vehicles from February this year, though the depreciation of the Rupee and high taxes/duties necessitated by the economic tumult have substantially increased prices. Nevertheless, more than 130,000 private vehicles have been registered after February 2025, improving the country’s mobility landscape. But it is necessary to develop the public transport network to keep vehicle and fuel imports at bay, a fact that the Government has acknowledged.

President Dissanayake and his Government have so far deftly managed to steer clear of any perceived bias towards any country or bloc in terms of foreign relations. This is no easy task, given the geopolitical rivalries and Sri Lanka’s strategic position in the Indian Ocean Region (IOR). The President visited both India and China in an official capacity, apart from Germany, UAE and Vietnam, This month, he will attend the United Nations General Assembly (UNGA) sessions in New York, after which he will undertake a state visit to Japan. All these visits serve to bolster bilateral and multilateral relations and improve our standing in the world. Yet, challenges such as Geneva remain and the Government must genuinely address the human rights and accountability concerns addressed therein.

On the domestic front too, there are many challenges that the Government will have to face over the coming months and years. We are still not out of the woods in economic terms and the Government will have to balance the books rather carefully. There are also trade union rumblings over various issues, which too have to be solved delicately. The President and his team have done much in a short period of one year, but there is a long and precarious road ahead.