Sri Lanka to release IMF technical assistance reports to opposition on request: MP

ECONOMYNEXT — Sri Lanka’s government has agreed to provide copies of the Technical Assistance Rteports compiled by the International Monetary Fund (IMF) to opposition party leaders on request, Tamil National Alliance (TNA) legislator M A Sumanthiran said.

Sumanthiran  was the only member of the opposition to attend a multi-party discussion with the International Monetary Fund (IMF) on the invitation of President Ranil Wickremesinghe.

Speaking to reporters outside the Presidential Secretariat in Colombo on Monday March 11 after the discussions, the Jaffna District MP said he had accepted the invitation extended by the president to opposition party leaders.

The main opposition Samagi Jana Balawegaya (SJB) and the opposition National People’s Power (NPP) boycotted the meeting.

According to Sumanthiran the prime minister, the Leader of the House, the two state ministers of finance, the governor of the central bank, and the treasury secretary joined Monday’s discussion.

“I raised some of our concerns. Firstly, the absence of transparency. The IMF provides Technical Assistance Reports to the government. These reports contain analysis on why these recommendations are made. They have so far not been made public. Today it was agreed that copies would be provided to me me and to other opposition party leaders too on request,” the MP said.

“With this we can see if these recommendations have an analytical basis or not. Upon studying the reports, we can say whether to support the IMF programme or not. We can see at the moment that the IMF programme is not beneficial to the poor of this country,” he said.

Sri Lanka’s opposition parties have not been overwhelmingly supportive of the IMF programme, the country’s 17th so far. Leftists outfits such as the National People’s Power (NPP) have historically taken an anti-IMF stance but recently met a group of representatives of the international lender.

The SJB, which is more inclined to share President Wickremesinghe’s liberal outlook, too has been critical, with its leader claiming that he would renegotiate the deal under terms more preferable to Sri Lanka. (Colombo/Mar11/2024)