Sri Lanka’s UNP open to Sajith as PM under common alliance, symbol: Saman R

ECONOMYNEXT — Sri Lanka’s United National Party (UNP) is open to naming Samagi Jana Balawegaya (SJB) leader Sajith Premadasa the prime minister pick for a common opposition alliance that will contest under a common symbol, a UNP spokesman said.

Following a meeting of parties supporting ex-President Ranil Wickremesinghe held on Flower Road, Colombo, on Monday September 30, UNP member Saman Ratnapriya told reporters that discussions were held between the UNP and the Sri Lanka Podujana Peramuna (SLPP) whose majority he said supports Wickremesinghe.

“There were discussions as UNP and as the majority group of the SLPP, and then the group led by former prime minister Dinesh Gunawardena had a discussion outside. The consensus among all of them is that there should be a common alliance under a common symbol.

“There is still room for the SJB to enter talks. But there is a question about whether the talks are going forward to the extent we had anticipated,” said Ratnapriya.

The former presidential advisor said there were issues on the symbol, referring to reports that the SJB had insisted on contesting the upcoming parliamentary election under its own ‘telephone’ symbol.

“On our side, the majority wants a common symbol. Normally when forming an alliance you don’t stick to your own party symbol. But talks are still ongoing. Groups have been appointed for this within the party,” he said.

Asked about a proposal to name Premadasa the new alliance’s leader, Ratnapriya said: “If Sajith comes, his party’s leader will be Sajith. The UNP’s leader will be Wickremesinghe. But there is no issues from us about giving him the prime ministerial candidacy. But we must contest as a joint alliance.”

Former Labour Minister Manusha Nanayakkara who also spoke to reporter after Monday’s meeting said their plan is to contest as a broad alliance.

“We believe everyone in the opposition should come together at this time. There are some who are reluctant to join forces because of various personal goals. So we’re looking to get together groups that work for a common cause. Discussions are still ongoing. I think in the coming days we can announce a final decision,” he said.

Commenting on a possible symbol choice for the proposed alliance, Nanayakkara said: “We’ll see if we can contest from the gas cylinder. The plan is to get everyone into a common alliance.” (Colombo/Sep30/2024)