CA Sri Lanka launches Business Language School and national ‘StepUp English’ CSR initiative

The Institute of Chartered Accountants of Sri Lanka (CA Sri Lanka) is broadening its role in shaping a more connected, confident and future-ready Sri Lanka with the launch of its School of Business Languages for professionals and StepUp English, a national CSR initiative offering free English language learning to students aged 15 and above across the country.

Together, the initiatives extend CA Sri Lanka’s commitment beyond professional qualifications, equipping professionals and young Sri Lankans with the language, communication and broader skills needed to embrace opportunities in an increasingly interconnected world.

The School of Business Languages was officially launched on 17 August 2026, to empower Chartered Accountants, business professionals and others with language, communication and cross-cultural capabilities to connect, collaborate and compete in an increasingly global business environment.

The launch was attended by CHEC Port City Colombo Assistant Managing Director Bai Xiaping, representatives from the Embassy of the People’s Republic of China in Sri Lanka, CA Sri Lanka President Tishan Subasinghe, Vice President Anoji de Silva, School of Business Languages Committee Chairperson Jani Ganeshan, and CEO Lakmali Priyangika.

Recognising that professional success today extends beyond technical expertise, the School of Business Languages will offer programs tailored to the evolving needs of professionals. Effective communication, cultural understanding and the ability to engage confidently across borders are increasingly important as businesses, investment and professional opportunities become more international.

The School’s initial offering includes Foundation in Chinese for Business Professionals, commencing in September 2026, and Business English for Professionals, commencing in October 2026. Arabic Language for Business Professionals and French Language for Business Professionals will follow as upcoming programs, providing learners with opportunities to build language capabilities and communicate with greater confidence across international markets, cultures and business environments.

Extending this commitment from the professional community to the next generation, CA Sri Lanka also launched StepUp English, a national CSR initiative aimed at helping Sri Lankan students aged 15 and above strengthen their English language skills and build confidence for higher education, future employment and wider opportunities.

Offered free of charge to students countrywide, StepUp English reflects CA Sri Lanka’s sense of national responsibility in its standing as the national body of accountants to broaden access to essential skills and support the development of a more confident, capable and future-ready generation.

Through StepUp English, CA Sri Lanka seeks to make English language learning more accessible to young Sri Lankans, regardless of where they live, while helping them build the communication skills needed to participate more confidently in education, employment and an increasingly interconnected world.

CA Sri Lanka President Tishan Subasinghe reflected on the Council’s theme, “Connect”, and the importance of ensuring that the accountancy profession, and the wider community it serves, remains connected to a rapidly changing world. He emphasised that as businesses, investment and opportunities increasingly cross borders, language and communication skills are becoming essential enablers of professional and personal advancement.

“The future of our profession cannot be shaped in isolation. While technical excellence will always remain at its core, our ability to connect with people, markets and ideas beyond our own borders will increasingly define how effectively we create value. Language is more than a means of communication; it is a gateway to understanding cultures, building trust and opening doors to new opportunities. Through the School of Business Languages, we are broadening the horizons of our students and members and empowering them to engage with the world with greater confidence,” Subasinghe said.

He added that initiatives such as StepUp English demonstrate how the Institute’s commitment to connection extends beyond the profession. “As a national body, we have a responsibility to equip the next generation with the skills and confidence to embrace the opportunities ahead. StepUp English is our contribution towards making English language learning more accessible to young Sri Lankans across the country and helping them build a stronger foundation for the future,”