All the box-office records ‘Spider-Man: Brand New Day’ has broken so far

Y!entertainment - Adding to its record tally, Spider-Man: Brand New Day has become the highest-grossing Hollywood film of all time in India, taking $10.6 million over the weekend for a cumulative $52.8 million.

Spider-Man, Spider-Man, breaks (almost) all the box office records a movie can.

After just seven days on screen, "Spider-Man: Brand New Day" roared past "Toy Story 5" to become the highest-grossing film of the year — providing a much-needed burst of energy to Marvel Studios amid growing superhero fatigue.

A stellar second weekend pushed the film's worldwide total to $1.65 billion, putting it on track to become the eighth film ever to cross the $2 billion mark during its theatrical run.

"Brand New Day" also delivered a record-breaking second weekend at the domestic box office, earning $145 million — the third-highest second weekend of all time. Only eight films have ever surpassed $100 million in their second weekend.

After a nearly a decade of uneven box-office performance for Marvel, "Brand New Day" has broken a string of box-office records, overtaking "Avengers: Endgame" in several categories while coming remarkably close in others.

Here are all the box-office records "Spider-Man: Brand New Day" has broken so far.

Biggest box-office opening of all time, grossing $360 million and surpassing "Avengers: Endgame"

Second-biggest global opening of all time, making $932 million, trailing only "Avengers: Endgame"

Fastest to reach $250 million domestically, crossed the mark in two days

Fastest to reach $500 million domestically, reached it in its first week, the first film to ever do so

Biggest Tuesday ever, with $42 million, surpassed the franchise's own "Spider-Man: Far From Home"

Third-largest second weekend ever, grossing $143 million, behind "Endgame" and "Avengers: Infinity War"

Second-fastest movie to reach $1 billion worldwide, reaching the milestone in six days, trailing only "Endgame"

Second-fastest movie to reach $1 billion internationally, reaching the mark in 12 days, behind "Endgame"

Highest-grossing Hollywood film in India, reaching $52 million, overtaking the previous record holder, "Avatar: The Way of Water"

Set all-time opening weekend records in more than a dozen countries, including France, Brazil, Spain, Peru, Chile, Saudi Arabia, Columbia, Belgium and Turkey

As the ninth live-action installment in the "Spider-Man" franchise, "Brand New Day" reinforces the character's status as both a fan favorite and a box-office powerhouse.

The "Spider-Man" films are the only non-"Avengers" films to rank among Marvel's five highest-grossing films, underscoring the web-slinger's enduring popularity and his role in the studio's continued success.

Marvel Studios' president Kevin Feige attributes the staggering box office success of "Spider-Man" with the enduring appeal of Peter Parker and the star power of Tom Holland.

"People can write about changing tastes, but as characters that grow and evolve through the decades, there are none better than the Marvel characters — and none better than Peter Parker," Feige told Variety. "When you find an actor like Tom Holland to bring that character to life, it is the magic formula."

In "Brand New Day's" shadow, "The Odyssey" continued its impressive run, earning $31 million during its fourth weekend, pushing its domestic total to $461 million and worldwide haul to $1.1 billion.

The film is now director Christopher Nolan's highest-grossing film ever and the fifth to cross the billion-dollar mark this year.

The 2026 billion-dollar club currently includes "Spider-Man: Brand New Day," "The Odyssey," "Toy Story 5," "The Super Mario Galaxy Movie" and "Michael" — the most billion-dollar films in a single year since the COVID-19 pandemic.

Nine films crossed the billion-dollar mark in 2019, the most of any year on record.

"The billion-dollar club has always been treated as a special box office milestone," Shawn Robbins, director of analytics at Fandango and founder of Box Office Theory, told CNBC. "It's also one that's become more challenging to achieve since the pandemic."

"The sheer number of films crossing this threshold can be a good indicator of a banner year," he added.

A combination of reliable blockbuster franchises, as well as a handful of low-budget breakout hits like "Obsession" and "Backrooms," have fueled the strongest summer for Hollywood in seven years.

The box office's resurgence is expected to carry through the year, with several major releases still on the horizon.

A slate of blockbusters landing this fall and early winter — including "Practical Magic 2," "Hunger Games: Sunrise on the Reaping," "Avengers: Doomsday" and "Dune 3″— are poised to keep audiences returning to theaters in the months ahead.

"The summer box office is incredibly important," Paul Dergarabedian, head of marketplace trends at movie data company Rentrak, said. "It's vitally important in terms of what the overall health of the industry looks like and what that portends for the entire year."