EDB and Global Electronics Association India jointly hold first-ever workshop in capacity building

On Hand Soldering and Wire Harness Techniques for NAITA students

Sri Lanka Export Development Board (SLEDB) organised a seminar cum workshop on Hand Soldering Techniques and Wire Harness Techniques in association with National Apprentice & Industrial Training Authority (NAITA), Global Electronics Association (IPC India), and Sri Lanka Electronic Manufacturers and Exporters Association (SLEMEA) on 13 August 2026 at Kenimadala Auditorium, NAITA Head Office. This event was the first of its kind held in Sri Lanka.

The Global Electronics Association, formally known as the International Electronics Manufacturing Association, headquartered in USA, is a multinational organisation that supports Original Equipment Manufacturers (OEMs), Electronic Manufacturing Services (EMS), Printed Circuit Board (PCB) manufacturers, Cable and Wire Harness Manufacturers and suppliers to manufacture high-quality products and services through set international standards in order to improve the manufacturing of world class electronics and to build electronics better. The Standards are accredited by the American National Standards Institute (ANSI) and some standards are adopted by US Defence, NASA, Society of Automotive Engineers and others. IPC India, the Indian chapter of the Global Electronics Association, worked closely with EDB in the recent years to support the local Electronic and Electrical industry organising several programs in Sri Lanka.

More than 150 participants attended this workshop including around 100 NAITA students who are undergoing training in areas such as Automobile, Soldering, Electronic and Electrical sectors. In addition, a delegation from IPC India, Management of EDB and NAITA, and NAITA instructors attended the interactive lectures and practical soldering demonstration.

The main objective of this event was to attract more skilled employees to the Electronic and Electrical industry and to introduce new courses and curricula to enroll more students targeting the Automobile, Soldering, Electronic and Electrical manufacturing and export sectors.

This event has provided a platform for professionals and industry experts to connect, share knowledge, and discuss the latest trends and advancements in Electronic Assembly. The Workshop featured insightful sessions by industry leaders, covering topics such as Emerging Technologies, Manufacturing Processes, Quality Standards, and Regulatory Compliances etc.

NAITA Vice Chairman Pandula Medawatte and SLEDB Director General Eranadika Dissanayake addressed the gathering, while Senior Regional Manager Vittal Vatar and Master IPC Trainer Saurabh Kumar Saxena, delivered speeches and Soldering demonstrations from Global Electronics Association (IPC India). NAITO Director General Dr. W.M.S. Wijesinghe also attended the event.

GPV Lanka Head of Quality and Production Engineering and Local Management Milroy Perera, Variosystems Manager – Training and Development Muditha Prasanna, Sri Lanka Electronic and Electrical Manufacturers and Exporters Association (SLEEMEA) President Gamini Ranasinghe delivered industry keynotes.

The country’s Electronics Industry has grown steadily thanks to government initiatives and support, skilled workforce and a favourable business environment. Due to its Advantageous Geographic Position and Highly Educated Workforce, notably in engineering and technology, Sri Lanka has the potential to become a significant player in the Global Electronic and Electrical Market.

The event was very significant for Sri Lanka’s Electronic and Electrical Industry. While continuing this endeavour, the EDB is planning to update/introduce NAITA courses and curricula with IPC standards and soldering techniques with the help of Global Electronics Association and SLEEMEA in the near future. In addition, the SLEEMEA is hoping to sign a Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) with NAITA to recruit skilled workforce that can cater to the requirement of the Electronic and Electrical manufacturing industry, which will be a significant milestone.