LOLC Divi Saviya initiative garners national recognition

LOLC Holdings PLC, the esteemed Sri Lankan multinational conglomerate, received a prestigious recognition from the Ministry of Education at national level, for its outstanding humanitarian endeavour, “LOLC Divi Saviya,” dedicated to enhancing the educational prospects of the nation’s children. This historic accolade signifies the first time a private sector entity has been honoured by the Ministry with such an esteemed national-level acknowledgment for its impactful efforts in enriching the educational space of the country.

Kapila Jayawardena, Group Managing Director/CEO of LOLC Holdings PLC and . Kithsiri Gunawardena, Chief Operating Officer, LOLC Holdings PLC, graciously accepted this recognition from Dr. Susil Premajayantha, Minister of Education, alongside to Ms. Wasantha Perera, Secretary to Ministry of Education and Ms. Udara Dikkumbura, Additional Secretary-School Affairs. The appreciation ceremony was held on the 14th of February at the Ministry of Education, Isurupaya, Battaramulla.

Speaking at the ceremony, Dr. Premajayantha, Minister of Education said, “I offer my heartfelt congratulations to LOLC for receiving this well-deserved national honour. From the inception, to the continuous sustenance of the Divi Saviya initiative, LOLC has established an admirable standard for corporate citizenship, displaying the significant impact private sector entities can make in positive social transformation. Through its comprehensive approach to education, LOLC has set new standards in driving positive social transformation, solidifying its position as a genuine advocate for national development. I urge more private sector entities to follow suit and to join us in contributing to uplifting the nation’s needs.”

Bilateral talks on facilitation of Sticky Rice imports to Sri Lanka

HydroGraph ties up with LOLC Advance Tech to tap $47 B market

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.