President Ranil expresses shock over Trump assassination attempt

President Ranil Wickremesinghe has expressed his shock about the assassination attempt on Donald Trump and said he was relieved to learn that the former U.S. President is safe.

The President stated that Sri Lankans have been at the receiving end of such violence in politics, and urged all to adhere to the laws protecting Democracy, the President’s Media Division reported.

Political leaders across the United States and the world expressed horror Saturday night over reports that gunshots were fired during Republican presidential candidate Donald Trump’s rally in Butler, Pennsylvania.

Republican and Democratic leaders, including Trump’s political rival and President Joe Biden condemned the incident. Biden conveyed relief over the former President’s safety, saying there’s “no place for this kind of violence in America” and he’s “grateful to hear that Trump is safe”.

“I’m praying for him and his family and for all those who were at the rally, as we await further information.... Jill and I are grateful to the Secret Service for getting him to safety. There’s no place for this kind of violence in America. We must unite as one nation to condemn it,” Biden said in a post on social media X.

Trump on social media has said that the bullet “pierced the upper part of my right ear,” resulting in “much bleeding.” He was hurried off the stage by Secret Service personnel, and taken to a medical centre. The unidentified gunman is reported to be dead, while another attendee was killed during the incident.

Vice President Kamala Harris also denounced the “abhorrent” attack, saying “we must all do our part to ensure that it does not lead to more violence.” She also expressed gratitude and praised the the swift action by the United States Secret Service, first responders, and local authorities.

Expressing deep concern over the attack, Indian Prime Minister Narendra Modi said: “Strongly condemn the incident. Violence has no place in politics and democracies. Wish him speedy recovery. Our thoughts and prayers are with the family of the deceased, those injured and the American people.”

Other notable officials from the US, including former Presidents George W. Bush and Barack Obama offered support to Trump and condemned the attack.

Obama said, “There is absolutely no place for political violence in our democracy. Although we don’t yet know exactly what happened, we should all be relieved that former President Trump wasn’t seriously hurt, and use this moment to recommit ourselves to civility and respect in our politics. Michelle and I are wishing him a quick recovery.”

“Laura and I are grateful that President Trump is safe following the cowardly attack on his life. And we commend the men and women of the Secret Service for their speedy response,” wrote George W. Bush on X.