Indian FM Jaishankar to visit Sri Lanka this month, to review agreed projects

ECONOMYNEXT – Indian External Affairs Minister S. Jaishankar will visit Sri Lanka this month to review ongoing projects between the two neighbours ahead of Prime Minister Narendra Modi’s visit, the island nation’s Foreign Minister said.

Jaishankar’s visit was confirmed when President Ranil Wickremesinghe was in New Delhi last week at Modi’s oath taking as the third term prime minister.

Sri Lanka’s Foreign Minister Ali Sabry said Modi’s invitation to Wickremesinghe shows an indication that India wants to work closely with the neighbours.

“We want to build on that momentum,” Sabry told reporters at a media briefing in Colombo.

“We feel that we want to continue to work with Indians in their investment area, people-to-people contact, tourism, and also connectivity like electricity as well as land and other connectivity areas of sea, air, and other modes of it.”

“I can confirm that external affairs minister of India Dr. Jaishankar is expected to be in Colombo in one of these days in this month.”

“He is coming here just to review ongoing partnerships in various areas – renewable energy, tourism, partnership between the central banks, and partnership between the Finance Ministries and also to prepare for an upcoming visit of Prime Minister Modi.”

Jaishankar’s visit comes at a time President Ranil Wickremesinghe government has seen rising anti-Indian sentiments on its key renewable energy project by Adani Green Energy and ahead of presidential election later this year.

Government sources say Modi is likely to visit Sri Lanka in August.

India has proposed land connectivity to establish Ramayana trails in Sri Lanka while both South Asian nations are exploring to establish oil and gas pipes as well as electricity grid between the two countries.

India helped Sri Lanka with financial and humanitarian aids when the island nation was facing its worst economic crisis in 2022.

India has been looking to expand its presence in Sri Lanka in oil, renewable energy and port sectors.

India, one of the fastest emerging world power has been pushing its influence in Sri Lanka after the island nation has seen strong influence from China after its lending and investments following the end of a 26-year war in 2009. (Colombo/June 14/2024)