Finnish Overseas Preschool opened at One Galle Face Mall

Finnish Overseas Preschool – Premium Day Care and Activity Centre has announced the official opening of its second location at Level 4, Units 11 & 12, One Galle Face Mall. This expansion marks a significant milestone in the landscape of early childhood education and reinforces the commitment of Modern Learning Studio, the parent organisation, to shape the future of education through innovation, culture, and holistic development.

The dynamic learning environment is designed to nurture a passion for learning, cultivate essential 21st-century skills, and create lasting, joyful childhood memories.

Yasmin Mubarak, Founder of Modern Learning Studio and Finnish Overseas Preschool, envisioned a child-centred space, promoting interactive learning through play, cultural appreciation, and individualised attention. Mubarak expressed, “Every child deserves a supportive environment for growth and learning. We use a play and hands-on experience-based approach, scientifically proven to help children learn better and stay motivated.”

The Finnish Preschool Colombo follows Finland’s renowned early learning philosophy, focusing on intrinsic values such as childhood, human growth, rights of the child, equity, equality, and diversity. Through child-initiated activities and a child-centred learning environment, the preschool aims to strengthen children’s self-image, social skills, and appreciation for equality and individuality.

Parents can rely on the Daycare Centre to provide a dynamic and safe environment for their children, fostering social skills like communication, empathy, trust, sharing, and caring through interactions with peers. The facility caters to children aged 6 months to 8 years, providing innovative teaching based on the latest Finnish play-based teaching methods.

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.