Sri Lanka’s corruption watchdog raises concerns over public resource abuse for polls

ECONOMYNEXT – Transparency International Sri Lanka (TISL), a non-government organization which is working against corruption, raised concerns over complaints of President Ranil Wickremesinghe’s election campaign using public resources owned by taxpayers money.

TISL, which has been in the island nation for the past 20 years, has deployed 200 officers to observe and collect data on public resource misuse and abuses and it has already received 45 complaints mostly against President Wickremesinghe’s campaign.

The complaints include incentives for government servants, developing various religious places, providing scholarships, opening of houses and buildings, providing computers, using buildings and playgrounds for election rallies, using Presidential Media Division to promote a specific candidate, using state media to promote and demote specific parties, distribution of goods to volunteer organizations, and providing deeds as well as loans, the TISL said.

“Misuse or abuse of public resources is a major form of corruption that has anyway engulfed this country not just during elections but throughout,” Nadishani Perera, the TISL’s Executive Director told reporters at a media briefing in Colombo on Monday (12).

“It is a way the country loses a lot of its resources. It is what results in its citizens not having access to the resources that they should have.”

The state resources are owned by the citizens of Sri Lanka and trustees of such resources are responsible for misuse and abuse of them, Perera said.

If found guilty for allowing misuse or abuse of public resources for elections, such public trustees will face an up to 100,000 rupee fine and/or three-year imprisonment.

Perera said allowing the misuse of public resources is a crime, violation, and breach of trust.

“That will be an absolute abuse that will affect the results of the election. Because certain candidates use all the state resources for their campaign, then the other candidates were to compete with this candidate, how can you have an equal level playing field?” she questioned.

“That will affect the way of holding a free and fair election.”

The constitution has now powered the Election Commission to prevent using state resources to promote or demote a candidate. Public trustees in charge of state assets are bound by the Election Commission regulations to stop abuse of state assets for elections.

The Election Commission in a directive on July 26 has stopped recruitment, promotions, and transfers in the state sector.

Already the Election Commission has received 337 complaints over violations of election laws since the election was declared.

The TISL said politicians in powers usually misuse human resources, physical assets, and state funds under the public resource abuses.

The TISL also observed that the ongoing negotiations on wage hike of plantation workers to 1,700 rupee are also a form of misuse of public resources.

“We have already forwarded most of these complaints to the Election Commission. The Election Commission is in the process of taking action over those complaints,” Thushani Kandilpana, a TISL election observer said.

The TISL urged the public to inform or lodge complaints on misuse or abuse of public resources through www.apesalli.lk or through 0763223442 and 011865777.  (Colombo/August 12/2024)