‘The Saint of the Islands’

The International Centre for Ethnic Studies (ICES) will premiere its latest documentary, ‘The Saint of the Islands’ on 28th March. The 72-minute documentary, directed by Anomaa Rajakaruna, will be screened at the Tharangani Theatre of the National Film Corporation in Colombo, Bauddhaloka Mawatha, Colombo 7, starting at 4 pm on the 28th.

The film explores the shared devotional traditions surrounding St Anthony of Padua, the patron saint of sailors and fishermen, against the backdrop of the annual feast on the island of Kachchateevu. In Sri Lanka, devotion to St Anthony often crosses religious and cultural boundaries, bringing together different communities that unite across practices of prayer and veneration. At the centre of the story is the annual gathering of devotees from Sri Lanka and India at the St. Anthony’s Shrine on the island of Kachchatheevu, located near the maritime border between the two countries.

Filmed during the annual feast at Kachchatheevu and on the nearby island of Neduntheevu (Delft Island), the documentary reflects on the intersection of faith, livelihood, and geopolitics in the Palk Strait. Kachchatheevu itself is a small, uninhabited island that remains deserted for most of the year.

Yet for two days every year, during the annual feast of St Anthony, it is transformed into a vibrant pilgrimage site as thousands of devotees brave the rough seas, and arrive by boat from both Sri Lanka and India. This year alone, almost 12,000 people from India and Sri Lanka, gathered on the island for prayer, worship, and community.

The film also captures the nearby island of Neduntheevu (Delft Island), one of the northernmost inhabited islands of Sri Lanka. Known for its distinctive landscape, coral-stone architecture, and long maritime history, Delft serves as an important point of departure for pilgrims travelling to Kachchatheevu. Through scenes of travel, pilgrimage, and worship, the documentary reflects on how the sea shapes the lives of coastal communities while also connecting people across national borders and across different religions.

More information can be found on the ICES website, www.ices.lk or by emailing uvini.ices@gmail.com

Iran war threatens Sri Lanka’s fragile recovery; SMEs face “Survival Crisis” – Prof. Rohan de Silva

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.