Appointment to the National Salaries Commission and many others adding to already heavy work load

My association with committees and commissions of inquiry was still not over. On April 26, 1995, I was appointed to the National Salaries Commission as a Member. The Salaries Commission was appointed by warrant issued under the hand of the President under the provisions of the Commissions of Inquiry Act. The Members of the -commission listed in the warrant were as follows:

Mr. B.C. Perera, former Civil Servant and Ambassador (Chairman), W.D. Gunasekera, former Judge of the Supreme Court, M.D.D. Pieris, Secretary to the Ministry of Education and Higher Education, Cyril Gamage, former Civil Servant and at the time Chairman of the Salaries and Cadres Committee, Professor (Dr.) Dayasiri Fernando, R.N. Asirvathan, Chartered Accountant and at the time Chairman, Bank of Ceylon, P.A.M. Deraniyagala, Senior Engineer and at the time Chairman of the State Engineering Corporation and later of the Ceylon Electricity Board, Major General M.C.H. Fernando, who had retired from the Army and A.R.L. Wijesekera, a senior officer of the Scientific Service and former Government Analyst.

The Secretary to the Commission was senior public servant Mr. D. Wijesinghe, who at the time of this writing is Secretary to the Cabinet.

The Terms of Reference were comprehensive and broad. They were as follows:

(1) To review the Salary Structures, allowances and other forms of remuneration, concessions and related matters of Public Officers, Judicial Officers and Employees of Statutory Boards or Corporations paid out of the Consolidated Fund, with a view to ensuring a contented Public Service required for the efficient and honest discharge of public duties, having regard to:

(b) The necessity to provide for the increasing need for specialization in Administration, Professional, Scientific and Technical skills so as to efficiently cater to all the activities in the Public Sector and the need to ensure that such skills are suitably recognized and adequately remunerated;

(c) Changes in the local job market in respect of skills currently required in the Public Service;

(d) Salary structural relationships among professional and occupational groups in neighbouring countries;

(e) Existing salary structural relationships among professional and occupational groups in the overall Public Sector and the need for their review and rationalization;

(f) Any anomalies created by ad hoc increases in remuneration and benefits that have been granted to sectors and sections of the Public Service and any other anomalies in the salary structure;

(g) The need to introduce principles of remuneration, including flexibility, to enable the Public Sector to be more responsive and efficient;

(h) The financial resources available to the Government and any equitable considerations that may be taken into account.

(2) To make recommendation on the basis of such review, for the comprehensive revision of salaries, allowances and other forms of remuneration and benefits to all employees in the Services referred to in paragraph (1) above and any other matters incidental to the Terms of Reference.

(3) To study and make recommendations as to the polices and measures that need to be taken to avoid ad hoc, unstudied, and uncoordinated adjustments and changes in salary structures in the Public Service.

The President wanted a report within five months. This was a massive task. The government also wanted us to look into the salary structure of the armed forces. The total number of employees that came within the terms of reference of the commission included 558,685 employees of the public service including employees of Provincial Councils and Local Authorities, 45,848 employees in Boards and Corporations falling within the purview of the commission; and over 100,000 service personnel. When the commission began its sittings the government also referred several other specific issues relating to public service salaries for its consideration.

The commission received 2,568 representations in response to a public invitation through the media, of which 822 or 32 per cent were from trade unions, federations of trade unions and professional associations. The commission was assisted by a carefully selected small core staff of considerable experience in the matters under inquiry. The commission arranged for special studies when necessary.

In these it was assisted by the Department of Census and Statistics, the Central Bank and in one instance by the Graduate Studies Department of the University of Colombo. We also obtained through the good offices of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, and through many of our embassies, information in regard to public service salary structures from Singapore, India, the United Kingdom, Pakistan, Bangladesh and Malaysia.

The commission sat on several days to hear oral representations from relevant trade unions, federations and associations. In all, we sat through 49 long meetings. For this purpose we had to meet on Saturdays, public holidays and on many occasions after normal office hours. The task also required extensive reading of memoranda, studies, statistical tables, etc., on a regular basis. I used to read a great deal of these in the car whilst commuting. In the end the commission issued a closely printed 113 page report, which with annexures came to 196 pages.

The commission was chaired most efficiently by Mr. B.C. Perera. He was an administrator with great experience and a former Secretary to the Ministry of Health and a former Ambassador. He knew the public service well. Both Mr. Perera and the Secretary Mr. Wijesinghe showed great diligence and worked very hard to meet deadlines. The Commissioners themselves coming from diverse backgrounds and a multiplicity of disciplines worked harmoniously together.

They were of the maturity, experience and standing to look at wage and salary issues nationally and not parochially. Although the task entrusted to us was quite onerous and the time given limited and everyone had to work quite hard sacrificing much of their leisure, it was a pleasant experience because of the camaraderie and mutual respect that existed amongst us.

I have already mentioned the many different responsibilities a Secretary had to shoulder, and the numerous governing Boards and Councils that I as Secretary to the Ministry of Education and Higher Education had either to chair or be a member of, in addition to my normal duties. It took me a while to discover that representation on some entailed ancillary duties. This time these were of a ceremonial nature, but they still had to be performed.

The National Institute of Education amongst its multifarious tasks also awarded diplomas and degrees in Education. It was a recognized degree awarding institution. The colleges of education awarded a diploma after a two year full time residential course and a year’s practical teacher training. The practice was that after the final examinations there was a convocation for these graduates and diplomates, which the parents also attended. According to convention and practice, the Secretary, who was also the Director General of Education had to perform the role of a Chancellor of a University on these occasions.

There was a special academic dress which one had to wear at these convocations. The first time I was faced with this situation, I refused to wear an academic dress. I said that I was a Civil Servant and not an academic and that I would come in a suit. This horrified the organizers and virtually under duress I had to wear an elaborate cloak. I told my colleagues that when my friends see me on TV in this dress they would think that I had taken leave of my senses. I could see however that being adamant or stubborn was useless. There was no option to being decked out in robes. I therefore went through a few occasions of relative discomfort in the interests of duty.

To complicate one’s life further was the fairly recent upsurge of fundamental rights applications before the Supreme Court. It appeared that almost any act of appointment, transfer or discipline led to the filing of a fundamental rights application. In a large Ministry like Education the numbers of such applications were fairly heavy. This meant a special load of work on the Additional Secretary Administration. It also meant not an insignificant amount of time off me.

The reason for this was that every application had the Minister as the first respondent and the Secretary as the second. This resulted in the necessity for us to forward affidavits to the Attorney General, which then reached the relevant State Counsel handling the case for us. Sometimes the matter was important enough for the subject to be handled by senior lawyers in the Attorney General’s Department, and for consultations to take place, some of which I personally had to attend.

There was the further irritation and the disruption to work caused by the relatively short lead time available for the affidavit to be submitted. Generally, by the time when an affidavit reached me for my signature the deadline was almost upon us, and I had to stop whatever work I was doing to rapidly read through it, interrupted in its course by several telephone calls, or sometimes a Member of Parliament walking into my room or some other disturbance.

Although by now we were trained to concentrate amidst disturbances, this was not easy. The fact that some affidavits ran into several pages in response to the averments in the fundamental rights application, made matters worse. In these matters one had to exercise diligence to the extent possible because these were documents that were to be filed before the Supreme Court of the country. There were in effect two issues that one had to bear in mind. The first was the respect one had for the court. The second was one’s own position and standing in the administration and the eternally important issue of one’s credibility in the eyes of the court.

On rare occasions though something comes up which threatens to disrupt these considerations. An affidavit landed on my table one day which I found it impossible to subscribe to. When I discussed matters with the Additional Secretary concerned I was told that after consulting counsel, my affidavit was prepared to support the Minister’s position. I pointed out my difficulty in doing so and stated that I could aver to only a few matters within my knowledge, and that I could not aver to fiction.

The additional Secretary was in a difficulty because if my affidavit did not contain the material typed in it, in his opinion the Minister would have had a problem. I said I would speak to the Attorney General, who was Mr. Shibly Aziz, PC. I knew Shibly and had worked with him on various cases in the past. I phoned and told him to kindly sort this problem out, because I was not prepared, under any circumstances to swear to an affidavit which I knew to be inaccurate. He was most sympathetic, personally handled the matter, so that I was able ultimately to sign to the best of my knowledge a truthful but much shorter document.

The disturbance and the impact of personnel matters did not stop at fundamental rights applications. There were times I had to appear before the Human Rights Commission, and the Public Petitions Committee in Parliament. All this meant prior preparation and time. Sometimes, these meetings led to a request for further information and attendance at further meetings. It must be said however that the members of both the commission and the Parliamentary Committee were extremely courteous and understanding, and this to an extent mitigated the pressures one faced.

I had once again to appear before the High Posts Committee in Parliament, a committee consisting of Ministers and senior Members of Parliament from all parties represented in Parliament. This was for the purpose of enabling the committee to judge as to whether I was suitable to hold the present “high” post. As on previous occasions, the members seemed somewhat embarrassed in calling me up. They were most courteous and kind, stated that they had to call me as a matter of formality, said they had no questions to ask, apologized for taking me away from my work and sent me away.

Committee on the allocation of the subject of technical education between ministries

After my appointment to the Salaries Commission I thought that I would enjoy some respite from appointment to any more commissions or committees. I was however wrong. A serious problem had arisen because of the decision by the government to allocate the subject of Technical Education to the Ministry of Labour and Vocational Training. Technical Education was at the time a responsibility of the Higher Education section of the Ministry of Education and Higher Education. The aim of the government was to transfer this subject to the Ministry of Labour and Vocational Training pending the setting up of an entirely new Ministry of Human Resource Development.

The proposed transfer was vehemently opposed by the students who were following the Diploma courses and the Higher National Diploma courses in the Technical Colleges. They strongly felt that their transfer away from Higher Education to Labour was a loss of prestige and would result in a devaluation of their diplomas which could have repercussions in the job market. Some of the lecturing staff were also opposed. Matters were getting to the point of street demonstrations, when the President called up a meeting of the two Ministries, as well as lecturer trade unions and representatives of student groups.

The diploma students were adamant. Therefore, a tentative decision was taken to retain the Diploma and the Higher National Diploma courses under Higher Education, and transfer the certificate and other courses to the Ministry of Labour. The dividing line was the GCE Advanced Level examination. All courses which required the Advanced Level qualifications were to be retained under Higher Education. Other courses were to be the responsibility of the other Ministry. This however necessitated going into a number of difficult questions of implementation including the sharing of the resources of the existing Technical Colleges by the two Ministries and the fixing of numerous responsibilities.

(Excerpted from In Pursuit of Governance, autobiography of  MDD Pieris) ✍️

Entering MIT for my Ph.D program, coping with harsh Boston winter and breasting the tape

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.