Concert in remembrance of two legends

The late Clarence Wijewardena and Milton Mallawarachchi will never ever be forgotten for their contribution to the music scene, both here and abroad.

They both had the unique ability to come up with songs that captivated the music minded public, both young and old…with meaningful lyrics and melodious music.

Clarence and Milton are being remembered in a very special way this Friday, February 16th.

Musaeus College Auditorium will be the venue for a special concert, ‘The Legacy of Clarence & Milton,’ to commemorate the 80th Birth Anniversary of Clarence Wijewardena and the 25 Death Anniversary of Milton Mallawarachchi.

No doubt, Clarence Wijewardena, known as the ‘Godfather of Sinhala Pop,’ revolutionised the Sri Lankan music, during the late ’60s, while Milton Mallawarachchi was referred to as the teenage heartthrob of the same era.

Singer Rajiv Sebastian, the brains behind this event, will be seen in action, on stage, along with Ranil Mallawarachchi (now based in Australia), while Indrani Perera, Shyami Fonseka and Lilanthi Karunanayake will join the duo on duets.

An added attraction will be Babu, the Prince of Tamil Pop, who will be travelling all the way from Canada, to give a new breath of life to the late Tamil Pop Chakrawarthi A. E. Manoharan.

Babu (real name Jeyakanthan Jeganathan) is well known in the music scene, in that part of the world, as ‘Montreal Babu,’ and he performs in Toronto with a popular band called Lathan Brothers.

He started his music career, in 1985, in Sri Lanka, with some of the popular local bands, at that point in time, including Thundersparks and Sithaara.

Vijaya Corea will handle the evening’s proceedings at ‘The Legacy of Clarence & Milton,’ while the original music of the ’70s will be recreated by RAJIV AND THE CLAN.

According to Rajiv, most of the artistes will perform in medley form, with their most popular hits, in order to accommodate as much as 50 songs.

If you are a lover of Sinhala music that is melodious and meaningful, you need to make a beeline to the Auditorium of Musaeus College, this Friday, February 16th.

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.