A symbolic victory

Israel’s international isolation over its relentless war on Gaza was reinforced at the current sessions of the United Nations General Assembly (UNGA), when several Western nations including Canada, Australia, United Kingdom and France declared that they would henceforth recognize the State of Palestine.

Even amidst a devastating war that has killed over 65,000 Palestinians, this is a major victory for the cause of Palestine. Whereas Global South countries such as Sri Lanka recognised a Palestinian State many years ago, many Western countries were loath to do so, as they did not want to upset their ties with the United States (US) and Israel.

But this time, the fact that they have moved the needle to recognise Palestine shows that the tragedy in Gaza can no longer be ignored. Recently, a UN panel concluded that Israel was committing acts of genocide in Gaza, where a renewed Israeli Defence Forces (IDF) ground operation is now underway, displacing thousands of Gazans. This aligns with the earlier findings of the International Criminal Court (ICC), which has censured Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin “Bibi” Netanyahu and several top officials for war crimes allegedly committed by the IDF.

While the declaration of broad support for a State of Palestine is largely symbolic at a time when there is no realistic path for such a solution given Israel’s intransigence over the issue, it does send a signal that many Western countries are wary of the optics of being seen as supportive of Israel. Some countries have gone further, stopping the supply of heavy weapons which are used to kill and main civilians in Gaza and elsewhere. Indeed, Israel recently attacked six neighbouring countries in just 72 hours.

One component of this multi-country attack riled even the US, Israel’s closest ally. The brazen attack on a residential compound apparently housing Hamas negotiators in Doha, Qatar, by IDF jets took the entire world by surprise – even the US received the information just minutes earlier. By the time it tried to warn Doha, the attack was already over. This has spurred global calls to rein in Israel, though it had promised the US not to repeat such stunts again. Although Israel does have a sizable military industrial complex that manufactures many types of weapons, it might not be able to wage war on this scale if Western weapons and aid dry up.

The State of Israel was created way back in 1948 by forcibly driving away around 750,000 Palestinians from their homeland – an event known as the Nakba (Catastrophe) in Arabic. They are still being driven away, with Israel annexing the Golan Heights (from Syria) and the West Bank in the meantime. Gaza City has become the latest target for Israeli annexation and some Far-Right Israeli politicians, who are even more extreme than Netanyahu, do not want any trace of a Palestine left when the IDF finishes the present offensive aimed at eliminating Hamas. Regardless of the methods used, almost all Israeli politicians do not want to see a separate State of Palestine. Most of them seem to spare no thought for the hostages still held by Hamas following their dastardly attack on Israeli civilians on October 7, 2023.

That attack was cruel beyond words, but the Israeli response was completely disproportionate as well. There should be no more room for the annihilation of an entire population. The time has come for a negotiated settlement that would eventually lead to a two-State solution, that has been accepted in principle by all countries including the US. But for this to happen, all sides must compromise – both the IDF and Hamas must cease all hostilities; Hamas must free all living hostages and handover the bodies of deceased hostages; Israel must also free all Palestinians being held without charges; Hamas must disarm and/or enter the democratic mainstream; Israel must immediately stop the further settlement of Occupied Territories and give them up in the long run; Israel must recognize the right of Palestine to exist and all Arab/Persian Gulf States must recognise Israel’s right to exist. This is by no means an exhaustive list of steps that could be taken to achieve peace in a volatile Middle East, but rather a template in that direction.

The two major wars that are being waged in different theatres – Russia-Ukraine and Israel-Gaza have collectively taken over a million lives, displaced an almost equal number and adversely affected the world economy in terms of energy, food and aviation, to name just three sectors. Even US President Donald Trump, who has successfully flexed his diplomatic muscles to resolve around five other long-running conflicts, has not been able to make much headway with regard to these two wars.

But the world just cannot afford to look the other way, because sooner or later, the effects of war reach every corner of the world. Both these wars involve nuclear powers and as President Trump himself told Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelensky, there is a chance that one of these conflicts could lead to World War III which could include nuclear strikes. That is an apocalypse that all those who value peace and diplomacy should strive to prevent.