Smoky experience…for Gypsies

The past few weeks, the popular Gypsies have been very much in the news, very specially for their skill in what they do, on stage, to entertain music lovers.

Yes, that was the scene, Down Under, when they went into action, on February 9th, in Melbourne, Australia, with a concert and dance.

According to reports coming my way, both events were well patronised, and a total success.

A Sri Lankan, who now resides in Melbourne, and a very keen reader of The Island, checked out the concert and said it was simply fabulous.

“Everyone present loved the music the Gypsies dished out, and we all had a great time.”

He went on to say that the crowd was very much impressed with the new-comer to the Gypsies scene, Shenal Nishahanka.

Shenal, in fact, is a rocker who can sing baila, too, and play the guitar, as well.

And when it was all over, and the Gypsies were ready to head for home, they had a smoky surprise awaiting them!

They had boarded SriLankan Airlines flight UL 605 which left Melbourne, heading for Colombo, around 6.15 pm on Monday, 12th February.

Everything was fine, on board, said Piyal, but 30 minutes into their flight a smoke issue cropped up where passengers saw and smelt smoke in the cabin, and also coming from the cockpit, at which stage the Captain announced that they have to circle back to Melbourne and make an emergency landing.

“Although the aircraft circled in the sky for about an hour before making an emergency landing, everyone was calm and the Gypsies were quite cool, as well,” said Piyal, adding that there were emergency vehicles stationed when they landed.

The Gypsies were accommodated in a hotel close to the airport, but they had to rough it out where clothes were concerned.

“We had with us only the clothes we were wearing, to board the flight. The rest were all packed and in the aircraft.

“Our stay at this hotel was fun as we were all dressed up as Kung fu fighters!

“Yes, let’s say our first trip to Australia, with our new lineup, was quite eventful.”

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.