Third successful BFAS held; this year with a school highlighting interfaith harmony

The third successful “Break-Fast At Sunset” was held on 31 March at the Vidyawardana Maha Vidyalaya of Pelawatta, Battaramulla. The event saw the participation of more than 1,500 including children, their parents, and invitees representing leadership of all faiths and public officials.

“This year we wanted to do something different and chose to break our fast with children of a few schools. Co-existence is a ‘feeling’ more than just a thought and we felt sharing this moment with children and their parents would be very special,” said Siddi Farook, Chairman of Sri Lanka Muslim Civil Society (SLMCS) which was established with the Motto of “Humanity Beyond Religion”.

“Fasting is a spiritual experience and goes beyond hunger. It is a month of reflection and review to help a person improve their character and reconnect with their purpose. It’s a month in which we assess our dealing with each other and identify how we can be better human beings on this earth in the little time we have together,” said BFAS Project Chairman Rizan Nazeer.

The event organised annually by SLMCS alongside Soup Kitchen, was held last year at Independence Square and served a large audience. This year it attracted children not only from the Vidyawardana Maha Vidyalaya but also those from surrounding schools as well namely Sri Sudarshana Vidyalaya and Vidyaloka Vidyalaya.

“As organisers our deepest desire and prayer is to build a Sri Lanka in which its people co-exist in harmony. Co-existence is not alien to us and has always been rooted within our hearts. Come what may and what has, we need to resolve to unite and do better for ourselves. We can contribute and do justice to our motherland only when we join hands together. We found this happening here today. This is true happiness,” said Zarina Akbarally.

A participant at the event Lekhani Ratnayake, teacher of Sri Sudarshana Vidyalaya said, “This event was beyond our expectation. We loved every moment of it and the way it was organised. We didn’t realise why Muslims fast, but today we understood that it’s more about sharing and being a better person. That’s what we all want and who we want our children to become. Thank you for having us here. We enjoyed the time together.”

The event witnessed the attendance of Ven. Galkande Dhammaloka Thero of Walpola Rahula Institute, Shk. Muneer Mulaffar, alongside venerable monks representing local Buddhist temples, Battaramulla Zonal Education Office Deputy Director of Education Sumeda Wanigasekara, Kaduwela MC Commissioner Nadeeka Dilrukshi, Thimbirigasyaya DS Office Director of Planning Division Chathuri Serasundara, Thalangama OIC Chief Inspector ASP Priyantha Ekanayake, Roshan Anurudda, Kaduwela MC former Opposition Leader Prema Ranjith Perera, principals and teachers from schools under Mealcare for Schools project which is led by SLMCS to