Veneration of sacred relics from 4 to 11 February at Hunupitiya Gangaramaya Temple

The veneration of the sacred relics, which are due to be brought to Sri Lanka with the intervention of Indian Prime Minister Narendra Modi and with the full patronage of the Government of India, will be held at the Hunupitiya Gangaramaya Temple in Colombo for seven days from 4 to 11 February.

A discussion to review the preliminary organisational arrangements was held this week at the Presidential Secretariat under the patronage of Public Security and Parliamentary Affairs Minister Ananda Wijepala and Secretary to the President Dr. Nandika Sanath Kumanayake.

The corporeal relics of the Buddha, discovered during excavations carried out in the 1960s in the state of Gujarat, the birthplace of Prime Minister Modi, have never previously been taken out of India. As a result of discussions held between Prime Minister Modi and President Anura Kumara Dissanayake during the Indian Prime Minister’s recent visit to Sri Lanka, this rare opportunity for the people of Sri Lanka to venerate these sacred relics has now been made possible.

The sacred relics are scheduled to arrive at the Bandaranaike International Airport, Katunayake, on 4 February. From that day onwards, the general public will be able to venerate the relics at the Hunupitiya Gangaramaya Temple.

Extensive discussions were held on the arrangements to be provided during the entire period, from the arrival of the sacred relics in Sri Lanka from India on 4 February until their return to India, as well as on the responsibilities assigned to the respective institutions and the related plans.

Expressing his views, Gangaramaya Temple Chief Incumbent Venerable Dr. Kirinde Assaji Nayaka Thera stated that it is the President’s expectation that all necessary facilities be provided in a manner that ensures the vast number of devotees arriving in Colombo for the veneration of the sacred relics do not face inconvenience. He also elaborated on the preparations already made at the Gangaramaya Temple for the sacred veneration.

Minister Wijepala stated that this is a historic occasion for the people of Sri Lanka, as well as a significant milestone in efforts to foster a Buddhist revival in the country.

The occasion was attended by the Maha Sangha, including Venerable Dr. Assaji Nayaka Thera, Buddhasasana, Religious and Cultural Affairs Minister Dr. Hiniduma Sunil Senevi, Deputy Minister Gamagedara Dissanayake, Western Province Governor Hanif Yusoof, Mayor of Colombo Vraie Cally Balthazaar, Public Security and Parliamentary Affairs Ministry Secretary Ravi Seneviratne, Secretaries of the relevant Ministries and Heads of State institutions, Director General of Government Information H.S.K.J. Bandara, the Commanders of the Tri-Forces, the Inspector General of Police and other heads of the security services, as well as representatives of private institutions extending their patronage to the event.