Sri Lanka unit of MCB Bank rated ‘AA-(lka)’ by Fitch, outlook stable

ECONOMYNEXT – Fitch Ratings has assigned a first-time national long-term rating of ‘AA-(lka)’ for the Sri Lanka branch of MCB Bank. The outlook is stable.

Fitch said MCBSL’s currency liquidity coverage ratio of 551% at end-1H24 is supported by the branch’s large cash balance and investments in Sri Lanka treasury securities, which make nearly 51% of its total assets.

Fitch’s assessment also takes into consideration the parent’s credit profile, which is constrained by the Pakistan sovereign.

Fitch Assigns MCB Bank – Sri Lanka Branch First-Time National Rating of ‘AA-(lka)’; Outlook Stable

Fitch Ratings – Colombo – 12 Sep 2024: Fitch Ratings has assigned MCB Bank Limited – Sri Lanka Branch (MCBSL) a first-time National Long-Term Rating of ‘AA-(lka)’. The Outlook is Stable.

Head Office Supports Rating: MCBSL’s rating reflects Fitch’s expectation of support, if required, from its head office of MCB Bank Limited (MCB), a large bank in Pakistan (CCC+) claiming nearly 7% of sector assets at end-2023. The rating is underpinned by MCBSL’s status as a branch of MCB, making it part of the same legal entity as MCB, subject to any regulatory constraints on MCB remitting money from Pakistan into Sri Lanka.

Fitch’s assessment also takes into consideration the parent’s credit profile, which is constrained by the Pakistan sovereign on high interconnectedness, as well as MCBSL’s operational integration with MCB and the small size of its branch, at 0.9% of MCB’s total assets.

Liquid Branch: MCBSL’s all currency liquidity coverage ratio of 551% at end-1H24 is supported by the branch’s large cash balance and investments in Sri Lanka treasury securities, which make nearly 51% of its total assets. We estimate that this covers around 90% of its deposit obligations. Part of its excess liquidity is also in the form of bank placements, which make up nearly 13.5% of assets.

MCBSL’s liquidity position is supported by its ability to access funding from MCB, as reflected in MCB’s adequate liquidity coverage ratio of 261.9%. MCB also maintains a stable funding position, indicated by a gross loan/customer deposits ratio of around 33.0% and a net stable funding ratio of 164.9%.

High Capital Buffers to Moderate: We expect MCBSL’s Common Equity Tier 1 ratio of 65% at end-1Q24 to decline moderately over the medium term due to loan growth alongside a stabilising economy. However, the ratio is likely to remain well above the system average of 14%. The bank’s capital buffers could be vulnerable should stress exceed our expectations, due to its small absolute capital base and high concentration towards small and mid-sized corporates and rising SME exposure.

Small Franchise: MCBSL’s operation in Sri Lanka is minimal, holding only 0.1% of system assets at end-1Q24. The bank’s business model focuses on riskier mid-sized and small corporate and SME borrowers. It also faces significant competition from larger banks.

Factors that Could, Individually or Collectively, Lead to Negative Rating Action/Downgrade

MCBSL’s National Rating would be downgraded upon a major change in Fitch’s expectation of support from MCB, such as a change in the branch’s legal status or the branch being wound down.

A downgrade of Pakistan’s Long-Term Issuer Default Rating, a weakening ability of the parent relative to the Pakistan sovereign or any other developments that affect the branch’s ability to service its obligations could also lead to a multiple-notch downgrade of MCBSL’s National Rating.

A change in the relativities among the credit profiles of issuers based in Sri Lanka could also prompt a downward revision in the rating.

Factors that Could, Individually or Collectively, Lead to Positive Rating Action/Upgrade

MCBSL’s National Rating could be upgraded should MCB’s credit profile improve, reflecting a greater ability to provide extraordinary support to the Sri Lankan branch. This assumes our expectation of the parent’s propensity to provide support remains unchanged.