Redeemers…big scene this year as well

The year 2023 was a happening scene for the band Redeemers, especially their tour of Australia in July/August.

The Sri Lankans, in that part of the world, went ga-ga over their music and there were lots of positive comments, on social media, about their performance, Down Under.

They were also seen in action, in Bahrain, in November of last year.

According to a spokesman for the band, the Redeemers have got some foreign assignments coming up this year, as well.

“There are about four-plus countries that we are negotiating with and, hopefully, 2024 will be another good year for the band where overseas trips are concerned”.

Locally, Redeemers shared the stage with the American band All-4-One when they performed in Colombo, in December 2023, in a concert organised by Gold FM.

In December, last year, the band also took over the entire production and successfully put together a New Year’s Eve dance 2023 at a five star venue, in Colombo.

Valentine’s Day is another event the band celebrates on a regular basis.

Other highlights, during the group’s illustrious five-year career, include Novid 2020, the first ever concert in Colombo, after the Covid pandemic, organised by the band.

In 2021, while the country was in shut down mode, with no public gatherings allowed, the band worked on a ‘virtual concert’ that was streamed in nine countries, simultaneously.

This year, Redeemers plan to celebrate their fifth anniversary, in June, with a special concert,

They say they will also be working on another New Year’s Eve spectacular to usher in 2025.

Their grandeur plans for their fans will also include a Redeemers Music Academy, and we will pass on the details to our readers no sooner this setup is finalised.

The guys also indicated to us that they have done a couple of originals and plan to release them within the next couple of months.

The outfit comprises Nishantha De Abrew (keyboards), John Premshan (vocals), Ruwanthi Ileperuma (vocals), Melon Perera (percussion), and co-founder members Ruwan Perera (drums), William Jay (bass), Dexter Batcho (lead vocals) and Ashan De Silva (guitar).

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.