IMF expects Sri Lanka to reach private creditor deal by next review

ECONOMYNEXT – The International Monetary Fund expects Sri Lanka to reach a deal with commercial creditors by the next review, Senior Mission Chief Peter Breuer said.

“…[O]ur strong expectation is that an agreement in principle would be reached with the commercial creditors by the time of the second review,” Breuer told reporters in response to a question on whether the review can be completed if there is a delay in reaching a deal with bond holders.

“As you may recall, we need to see a path towards restoring debt sustainability in Sri Lanka. For the IMF lending, that’s a precondition. And it’s really important for that process to be completed soon.”

IMF understood that “negotiations are ongoing, proposals are being exchanged,” he said.

Some loans by China Development Bank are also classified as commercial.

Sri Lanka took non-project loans from CDB as well as bond holders as the country ran into forex shortages under flexible inflation targeting as rates were cut with inflationary open market operations (printed money) to target “potential output”, and lost reserves, critics have said.

The practice has been effectively legalized under a new monetary law.

RELATED China on track to bail out Sri Lanka with US$1.25bn in 2018

“There is also the China Development Bank, which is considered a commercial creditor. And so their negotiations are still ongoing just as they are with the bondholders,” Breuer said.

In December bondholders have expressed unhappiness at what they called at the slow progress in talks and the lack of “substantive” negotiations.

In middle income countries with bad central banks that default, it is usual for deals with official creditors, which are usually large to be reached first.

In the case of Sri Lanka bond holders form a large share of external debt. Sri Lanka also had to restructure domestic debt.

“When you say the Sri Lanka debt restructuring, it’s actually something like ten different processes, given all this very complicated creditor landscape,” Breuer said.

“And so doing this sequentially makes sense because there’s a limited capacity to how much you can do all at the same time.

“Of course, you know, there is engagement with all of these creditors. But now that the first two major blocks are close to being completed, the third one can be tackled.” (Colombo/Jan20/2023)