Obama joins Kamala’s campaign trail, boostig her chances

Trump secretly sent Putin coveted Covid testing machines at height of shortage – Bob Woodward

George Washington’s farewell address delivered at Mount Vernon at the end of his second term in 1796, when he was 64-year-old, “stands today as a timeless warning about the forces that threaten American democracy”.

No president ever wanted to be the president of the United States as passionately as Washington. He deemed the pinnacle of his achievement to be the winning of independence from England and paving the way to the Federal Constitutional Convention in Philadelphia, where he sat as its presiding officer till 1787. He most reluctantly accepted the presidency in 1789, and again in 1793. But in 1796, he was firm in his refusal, as he considered the presidency to be just an epilogue to his career, not his greatest achievement.

Washington worried that “party loyalty makes nations weaker, not stronger; that parties fighting for power (disguised as patriotism) serves to distract the public councils and enfeebles the public administration; it enables jealousies and false alarms; kindles the animosity of one party against the other; and foments occasional riots and insurrections. It opens the door to foreign influence and corruption, which finds facilitated access to the government itself through the channels of party passions”.

The main thrust of his Farewell Address is that “Americans should focus on what’s better for the country, not what’s better for their political party”.

Some 136 years later, Franklin Delano Roosevelt, a Democrat, was elected to the presidency in 1932, when America was in the depths of the Great Depression. The progressive policies of his New Deal enabled the nation to successfully navigate the Depression. His second term ended in 1940, when America was on the brink of World War II.

FDR broke the unwritten law set by Washington by running for a third term, defeating Republican Wendell L. Wilkie by a landslide of 449 to 82 electoral votes and a popular vote exceeding four million.

The Republican platform at that time was under the control of the America First Committee (AFC), an isolationist pressure group which was against the United States’ entry into World War II. The AFC, founded by former Republican President Woodrow Wilson after World War II, counted amongst its leaders luminaries like former President Warren G. Harding, Charles Lindbergh and Henry Ford, who were friendly with Hitler and sympathized with Nazi anti-Semitic policies. They were powerful leaders who, in those days, wielded enormous political influence.

AFC was rather like the MAGA (Make America Great Again) cult, founded and led by former President Donald Trump, that controls the Republican Party of today.

Had FDR adhered to the unwritten law after Washington’s Presidency and Republican Wendell Wilkie defeated the Democratic candidate for the presidency in 1940, the AFC, with its pro-Nazi ties and isolationist policies, may have persuaded Wilkie not to have America involved in the European tribal war against Hitler’s Germany.

There is little doubt Great Britain and the allies would have capitulated to Hitler in World War II, without the active participation of the United States.

Pearl Harbor was, according to FDR, “a day that will live in infamy”, that propelled the US to join its European allies in the war against Axis Powers of Germany, Italy and Japan. After the war, America joined the military alliance, formalized as the North American Treaty Organization (NATO), that defeated the Nazi menace of Hitler. NATO has endured as the strongest military alliance in history to this day.

After FDR died in 1945 during his fourth term, the two-term limit for the presidency was ratified by the 22nd Amendment to the constitution in 1951.

As Winston Churchill said, “The farther back you can look, the farther forward you are likely to see”.

I wrote an article during Trump’s presidency, indulging a fantasy that, had the two-term limit remained just an “unwritten law” in 2016, and not a constitutional Amendment, President Obama, who had completed two presidential terms of unparalleled competence, without a shadow of any kind of scandal, may have been persuaded to run for a third term. He had a popularity rating of over 70%, the highest ever for a departing president.

President Obama would not have allowed himself to be diminished by Trump’s Russian connections, his racist taunts and his juvenile nicknames. A man of Obama’s principled stature would have crushed Trump like the criminal moron he is. He would have won re-election for a third term in 2016 by an indisputable landslide, and headed an administration which would have sidestepped the horrors America has endured since Trump came down that golden elevator in 2016, when he announced his candidature for the presidency with a Hitler-like anti-immigrant rant that has polarized the US as never before.

Thanks to the 22nd Amendment, Donald Trump, with a little bit of help from his Russian mentor, Putin, was elected to the White House in 2016, defeating Democratic candidate, Hillary Clinton.

In that article, I also expressed my disgust at the policies of the Trump administration, which were intent of subverting all the progressive steps taken by President Obama. Trump kicked off his administration with the colossal lie that the booming economy he inherited from Obama, with 75 weeks of consecutive economic development and the lowest unemployment rate in decades, was his own creation.

The first hint of Trump’s authoritarian ambitions was when he, like other dictators of the 20th century such as Hitler, Stalin and Mao, started calling the press “the enemy of the people”.

He followed through with policies that had the US withdraw from the Paris Agreement on climate change mitigation, with the moronic claim that climate change, which is even today proving to be the greatest danger facing the planet, is a hoax; by deregulating all the laws against pollution that President Obama had put in place; by pandering to the billionaire class and corporations with huge tax breaks; by polarizing the country by the racist demonization of brown-skinned immigrants; and by disbanding the National Security Council directorate, created by President Obama, charged with preparing for when, not if, another epidemic would hit the nation. This was a facility, initiated with presidential foresight, which would have helped in mitigating the chaos and loss of life when Covid hit the nation in 2019.

Americans realized the magnitude of their mistake and “fired” Trump comprehensively in 2020. President Biden won the presidency with an Electoral College rout of 302 – 236 votes and a record popular majority of over seven million votes.

A defeat which Trump, against all evidence, has still refused to concede, and “fought like hell” with lies, an insurrection and all the criminal weapons available to him and his white supremacist cult. The fight goes on, three years later.

Three long years, during which Trump has been adjudicated a rapist and a fraud, convicted of 34 felonies, awaiting trial on three more trials with 57 more felony charges. Three years when he is, amazingly, not in prison but the Republican candidate for the presidency, in an election he has a real chance of being re-elected as the 47th President of the United States!

This was thanks, of course, to the dilatory tactics employed by the most partisan, corrupt Supreme Court in the history of the nation.

America has less than 30 days to make a decision which ideological path it will choose for the future.

The first choice would be the Democratic Party, led by Vice-President Kamala Harris. The party guarantees a continuance of the democratic process of the constitution created by its Founding Fathers 250 years ago. A path that heeds all the prescient warnings and wisdom contained in the Farewell Address of the Father of the Nation, George Washington.

Vice-President Harris, who has been criticized for “not letting the public to get to know her”, has recently been doing a media blitz. She has appeared on “The Tonight Show with Stephen Colbert”, “The View”, “Call Her Daddy” and many other popular TV shows and podcasts, acquitting herself brilliantly, with compassion and humor. All the while carrying out her executive duties in ensuring that the needs of the victims of Hurricane Helene were being met to the best of the government’s substantial resources.

She has been actively wooing disgruntled Republican voters, with considerable success in attracting many prominent leaders, like the Cheneys, who have already endorsed her. She has also stated that she would have a Republican in her cabinet and has been floating the idea (tongue-in-cheek?) that she may offer Mitt Romney, a previous Republican candidate for the presidency in 2012, the coveted position of Secretary of State in her administration. A strategy which may persuade moderate Republicans disgusted with Trump (and there are millions) who had decided not to vote, to change their minds.

Until last Thursday, Kamala was leading with a razor-thin margin in the battleground states, though it still remains a race too close to call.

Kamala’s odds may have received the expected boost when the most popular Democrat in the nation, former President Barack Obama made a spectacular entry into the campaign trail last Thursday, in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania. In a riveting speech, he praised Kamala’s record, saying she will be ready to do the job from Day One, which she has proved by a lifetime of public service. He mocked Trump, annihilating him with sardonic humor as only he can, turning Trump’s lies against himself. He granted that the election is tight “because there are a lot of Americans struggling out there”. He said, “What I can’t understand is why anyone would think that Donald Trump (whom he characterized as a ‘whiny and selfish billionaire who only cares about his ego, his money, his crowd sizes and his status’) will shake up things in a way that is good for you”.

President Obama will be on the campaign trail, joined by his equally popular wife, Michelle, till Election Day, which will undoubtedly increase Kamala’s chances of success.

If elected for a second term, Trump will withdraw from NATO and stop all aid to Ukraine, which will enable Putin’s Russia to complete the occupation of a sovereign nation. He will provide all assistance to his equally murderous war criminal buddy, Bibi Netanyahu, to finally complete the genocide of the Palestinian people and establish a one-state solution for the Promised Land. Trump will also set a precedent for other tyrants, that America will only watch, even encourage its new-found allies, while they break international laws and trample the sovereignty of smaller sovereign nations.

It was an open secret that Trump had a “special relationship” with Putin during his presidency. Who can forget his near-treasonous performance after the Helsinki Summit in 2018, when he stood onstage with Russian President, Vladimir Putin, and accepted the former KGB officer’s lies that Russia had not interfered in the 2016 election. A direct betrayal of all 17 of the US intelligence agencies, which had unanimously confirmed Russia’s interference.

The Washington Post revealed, according to a book entitled “War” by legendary journalist, Bob Woodward, to be released next week, that “As the Coronavirus tore through the world in 2020, and the United States and other countries were confronted with a desperate shortage of tests to detect the illness, Trump secretly sent a package of coveted Covid tests to Vladimir Putin for his personal use”.

The book also claims that Trump has had a continuing relationship with Putin since he left the White House in 2021; that Trump has had several private telephone conversations with Putin, and allegedly continues to share America’s top-secret information with the nation’s top adversary and his long-time puppet-master.

Trump has been predictably politicizing the hurricane, spreading lies that the administration is failing in its efforts to look after the affected citizens in North Carolina, Georgia and other states hit by Helene. Downright lies, which were immediately denied by all the Governors of the affected states, Republican and Democrat. Vicious lies that Republicans like Trump and Vance spew for political gain, although they know these lies put desperate peoples’ lives in danger. And they don’t care.

When Kamala heard about these lies, she threw up her hands in the air, and said, “Have you no empathy, man!”. No. He doesn’t. None. Except for himself.

The future of the nation in a Republican administration is clearly outlined in the conservative Heritage Foundation creation of the 925-page document, “The Project 2025 – Mandate for Leadership”. In essence, Authoritarian Governance for Dummies.

Whether Kamala Harris wins with a slight majority, which is what the polls predict today, or, as is my fervent hope, the undecided and moderate Republican voters finally come to their senses and give her an indisputable majority, Trump will still never concede.

In the event of a close election, there is the possibility that the aforementioned partisan Supreme Court would overturn the results of a few swing states with small Democratic majorities, and award the presidency to Trump.

The only certainty after the November 5 election is that there will be violence, which will make the January 6, 2021 insurrection look like a walk in the park.

Fortunately, President Biden will be the incumbent Commander-in Chief after the election. He will order the full might of the federal law enforcement and military forces to quell any violence. He will also ensure that the constitutional transfer of power, as mandated by the will of the people, will be upheld.

If Trump wins the election, or is fraudulently awarded the presidency, then America would have made its decision. To abandon democracy and embrace the ideology of an authoritarian kleptocracy, with a Mad King at the helm, supported by a bunch of white supremacist neo-Nazis calling the shots.

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.