A Rising Man

A shorter piece today, after the lengthy tale set in Tudor England. This one too is set in the past, but just a hundred years back, like A Queer Case. But this one is set in a distant land, in British India, in the period just after the First World War when the movement for home rule was gathering strength.

The book was given to me by Robert Scoble, who presented a whole set of Brahms and Simon novels including their three detective stories. But this one was just on loan for the duration of my cruise. At dinner he told me about a detective series set in Calcutta, which sounded so interesting that I asked to borrow the first in the series.

So, the following morning, when he turned up to collect something he had dropped in the restaurant, he gave me A Rising Man by Abir Mukherjee, a Bengali born and brought up in Scotland. His hero is a British Police Officer in Calcutta just after the First World War, Captain Sam Wyndham. The Watson to his Holmes is an Indian Police Sergeant called Surendranath Bannerjee, who had been called Surrender Not by Inspector Digby, who had been his boss before Wyndham appeared, in a higher rank. Wyndham realized that Digby, who had long service but had not been promoted as might have been expected, was not too happy about this.

The novel begins with the discovery of the body of a high-ranking Civil Servant, in a shady part of the city, very near a brothel. Alexander MacAuley is a principal aide to the Lieutenant Governor of Calcutta, next only to the Viceroy in importance. There is a note stuffed in his mouth suggesting that the murder was the work of Indian radicals, and Wyndham soon discovers, through Digby, that there had been a meeting of radicals that very night.

But Bannerjee points out that the note seems like a plant, and Wyndham realizes that he needs to investigate further. Though the leader of the radicals is arrested, and the army, entrusted with the case by the Lieutenant Governor, is determined to find him guilty, Wyndham delves deeper and realizes that McAuley had seemed a tormented man in the months before his death, and he needs to check on what he was doing in the brothel, as well as the involvement of a businessman to whom he had been close.

The terrorist tells Wyndham that he had decided to shift to Gandhi’s non-violent approach and, though the army will have no truck with this, Wyndham believes him and, after some nifty detective work – which includes interviewing one of the prostitutes in the brothel who is soon afterwards found dead – he establishes that MacAuley had acted as a procurer, but then felt qualms about what he had been doing, which is why he had been silenced.

Bannerjee kills the murderer who had lured Wyndham into a trap, and there is enough evidence for the Lieutenant Governor to commute the sentence of death on the reformed terrorist, and instead exile him to the Andamans. And Wyndham’s boss, the Commissioner of Police, is able to affirm the independence of his department, and limit interference from the forces and the Lieutenant Governor, given that he is able to show their involvement in the cover up.

Though politics is not the subject of the story, there is much about what was going on in India at the time, and one gets a strong sense of how thin was the façade of British superiority. It was based on claims to a moral high ground which Mukherjee makes clear was mythical, though as the great analyst of the failure of the British in India, Paul Scott, indicated, there were many individuals who believed in that perspective. The crisis they had to face was where to stand when it became clear that their peers were cynical about the values they were supposed to uphold, and thus brutal in their dealings with Indians.

I also found fascinating the description of the many faces of Calcutta, which I am less familiar with than the other big cities of India. Mukherjee looks at Calcutta in its heyday, just a few years after it had ceased to be the capital of British India. The move was under Curzon, who understood the dangers of Bengali domination of nationalism. Though the province had been divided, to reduce its influence, that decision was changed, but instead the capital was moved away and gradually Bengali domination of the nationalist movement diminished.

Mukherjee captures the sense of a city and an administration dwindling in influence, but also notes the remnants of its past domination. And the contrast between the grand haunts of the British, and sordid areas they also penetrated, is powerfully presented.

As with Shardlake and his henchman, Wyndham and his Indian mate are characters I hope to read more about.

Meththa Rehabilitation Foundation: Restoring Mobility, Dignity and Hope Across Sri Lanka

Role of identity in the making and breaking of West Asian peace

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.