“LTTE diaspora will not fund Government again, will not vote to bring it back,” Says MP Archchuna

Colombo, June 14 (Daily Mirror) - Jaffna District Parliamentarian Ramanathan Archchuna has alleged that the LTTE diaspora, which he claimed had previously supported the government, will no longer provide financial backing or vote to return it to power.

He made these remarks while addressing the “Mehewaraka Pranamaya” event held in Kalutara, organised by MP Rohitha Abeygunawardena, where he launched a strong critique of the current administration.

Archchuna said the public had been misled and claimed that no meaningful development had been delivered to either the Sinhala or Tamil communities since the government came to power. He also praised former President Mahinda Rajapaksa, stating that he highly values his contribution to the country.

The MP said he does not prefer to refer to anyone as President in Sri Lanka except Mahinda Rajapaksa, adding that leadership should be entrusted only to those who genuinely love the country and all ethnic communities. He stressed that a President must be truthful to all nationalities, warning that misleading the country would be the worst action a leader could take.

“I supported the current President Anura Kumara Dissanayake, but now the whole country, including myself, is suffering for electing him,” he said.

He further stated that if the government continues in the same direction until 2029, at least 10 MPs may no longer remain in Parliament. He also expressed confidence that Namal Rajapaksa would become President in 2029 and resolve outstanding issues affecting both Sinhala and Tamil communities, claiming the current administration would not achieve progress before then.

The MP also alleged that the government has misled foreign countries and claimed it would struggle to win upcoming Provincial Council elections.

He called for all ethnic communities in the country to unite in order to build and develop the nation.

Archchuna further alleged that the LTTE diaspora had financially supported the government’s rise to power but said that “no more funding” would be given, claiming their expectations had not been fulfilled. He also alleged that both the diaspora and the public had been deceived.

Speaking at the event, he stated that funds had been given in expectation of political change but claimed that the government had failed to deliver. He further made remarks referring to internal political actors, alleging that the diaspora had supported bringing certain leaders into power, but insisted that the current administration “cannot even provide a single rupee, let alone political power.”

He added that people are now suffering as a result of bringing this government to power and reiterated his belief that Namal Rajapaksa would assume leadership in 2029 and resolve national issues.

Archchuna also said he fears he may face legal consequences for his statements, claiming that multiple court cases have already been filed against him, though he said he is not aware of the reasons for them.