99x and MAS Foundation for Change install Ocean Strainer to address plastic pollution

99x, a global product engineering company installed an Ocean Strainer to address the issue of ocean plastic pollution as part of the company’s sustainability initiatives focusing on the environment. This 80-foot strainer was installed in the Lunawa Lagoon in Moratuwa, in collaboration with the MAS Foundation for Change.

The Ocean Strainer is a floating trap designed by MAS Holdings to collect and remove plastic waste from waterways and preventing plastics reaching the ocean. The Lunawa Lagoon ecosystem is extremely polluted due to the significant amount of waste entering the lagoon through the four canals. This project has the potential to offer a long-term holistic solution to floating macro plastic pollution, by successfully preventing the entry of debris from the largest of the forementioned four canals, promising an immediate positive impact on the entire Lagoon ecosystem. The installed Ocean Strainer is expected to capture over 20,000 kg of waste annually, which will be collected and disposed responsibly by local authorities.

Shehani Seneviratne, Chief Operating Officer of 99x, commented, “Pollution from microplastics is a critical issue that we must address in a sustainable manner. By installing an Ocean Strainer, we go further to address plastic pollution at its source, where we prevent plastic waste before it enters the ocean. We are delighted to partner with the MAS Foundation for Change for this engagement and appreciate their commitment towards this cause”.

Related Topics:99x and MAS Foundation for Change install Ocean Strainer to address plastic pollutionOcean Strainerplastic pollution

Price controls to be removed from rupee lending rates from April 1 – CBSL Governor

Kristofer Quadros appointed Cluster General Manager for three Radisson Hotels in Sri Lanka

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.