Sri Lanka Veterinary Association celebrates World Veterinary Day

The Sri Lanka Veterinary Association (SLVA) marked World Veterinary Day on April 27, 2024, with a social media campaign emphasising the critical role veterinarians play in safeguarding public health. This year’s theme, “Veterinarians are essential health workers,” underlines their diverse contributions beyond animal care.

“Veterinarians are often unseen activists in safeguarding public health,” stated Dr. Mohamed Ijas, President of Sri Lanka Veterinary Association. “To mark World Veterinary Day, we aim to raise awareness of the diverse ways veterinarians contribute to the well-being of animals, humans, environment and the role in ‘’One Health’’ concept. Their crucial contribution in ensuring public health, and by promoting a deeper understanding of their diverse contributions, we can foster a healthier future for all.”

“World Veterinary Day’’ is celebrated on the last Saturday of April every year and highlights the importance of veterinarians in preventing zoonotic diseases – those transmissible from animals to humans. As veterinarians are equipped with a deep understanding of the interconnectedness of human, animal, and environmental health, this collaborative approach “One Health’’ concept is crucial for preventing communicable disease outbreaks, epidemics, and pandemics, thus promoting global health to ensure overall well-being of human population.

The campaign further emphasised the role of veterinarians in food security. Veterinarians are key players in ensuring food safety, by overseeing animal production practices, supply chain of food of animal origin, to ensure safety and quality of meat, milk, and eggs consumed by the public. This guarantees human nutrition and prevent diseases that are transmitted through food of animal origin thus it is apparent veterinarians are key players in maintaining a healthy population.

Related Topics:Sri Lanka Veterinary AssociationSri Lanka Veterinary Association celebrates World Veterinary DayWorld Veterinary Day

The Four A’s Advertising Festival set to transform Sri Lanka’s creative communications industry

CSE exudes bullish exuberance with turnover of Rs. 4 billion and 12 crossings

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.