Futility of rhetoric and need for unity

The JVP-NPP government would have the public believe that the economy is resilient enough to absorb external shocks, and the rupee is stabilising. True, the rupee has staged a countertrend rally recently, but the situation is far from rosy. Anything is possible in this topsy-turvy world, with US President Donald Trump acting whimsically. Much more therefore needs to be done to strengthen the rupee. This requires a truly national effort. Sadly, the government and the Opposition are at daggers drawn, and do not see eye to eye even on crucial economic issues.

Opposition politicians parade their supposed knowledge of economic affairs in Parliament, which is full of backseat drivers who claim to know the way but cannot drive. They keep on telling the public what they think is wrong with the economy. There is absolutely no need for them to do so, for the country’s economic problems and their root causes are all too well known. What the public wants to know is how the Opposition proposes to solve them.

Interestingly, the SLPP, which mismanaged the economy and bankrupted the country, is also critical of the incumbent government’s economic performance. Its leaders are lecturing the government on how to run the economy. What it is doing is like a bankrupt businessman conducting lectures on business management.

While out of power, the JVP/NPP also lectured previous governments on how to manage the economy. Its leaders would even brag that raising funds to settle the country’s external debt was child’s play, but now they are struggling to increase the forex inflow and navigate a host of other economic issues. Some of them even claimed they would be able to build the country’s foreign currency reserves by asking their supporters residing overseas to send in dollars. Between saying and doing, many a pair of shoes is said to be worn out.

The JVP was prominent among the political parties that resisted President Ranil Wickremesinghe’s modus operandi to put the economy back on an even keel during the previous government. It also berated the IMF and pledged to renegotiate the ongoing bailout programme if voted into power. It opposed tax and tariff increases and demanded that relief be granted to the public even at the expense of the economic recovery measures. It insulted Wickremesinghe, claiming that he was too old to rule the country and derisively called him Seeya (grandpa). Today, in a strange twist of fate, the JVP-led NPP government has chosen to pursue Wickremesinghe’s economic policies (‘Seeyanomics’?). It is jacking up taxes and tariffs and curtailing state expenditure in a desperate bid to boost revenue.

President Wickremesinghe got his act together on the economic front, and made tough decisions, regardless of their political consequences, and straightened up the economy, but he could not win the last presidential election because he succumbed to the arrogance of power and blundered on the political front, shielding as he did crooks of all sorts. Other political leaders, especially President Anura Kumara Dissanayake should learn from Wickremesinghe’s experience.

The Opposition’s right to criticise the government and its policies, economic or otherwise, cannot be questioned. It must act as a countervailing force against the party in power, but it should stop playing politics with the economy and allow the government to do what needs to be done to shore up the country’s foreign currency reserves and strengthen the rupee.

A strategy to mitigate the adverse impact of external pressures on the country’s foreign currency reserves consists in curtailing the foreign exchange outflow. The need for import restrictions, etc., cannot be overstated. Governments usually fight shy of adopting such drastic yet essential measures, fearing political consequences and protests by their political rivals. Procrastination worsens crises. This is why a consensual approach is needed to resolve existential issues facing the nation.

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.