Complete MEP Services by Hayleys Fentons for Vallibel Finance new corporate office in Colombo 03

Vallibel Finances new corporate office and installations by Hayleys Fentons

Vallibel Finance’s new corporate office in Colombo 3 stands tall as a symbol of innovation and efficiency, thanks to the expertise of Hayleys Fentons, Sri Lanka’s premier MEP contractor. Spanning 16 floors on a 42-perch plot, this cutting-edge building boasts state-of-the-art MEP installations for a new 110,000-square-foot corporate space.

This project by Hayleys Fentons was successfully completed by providing specialised installations, such as a modern Fire Protection and Detection System, and integrating cutting-edge technology for the building’s Chiller Management System (CMS).

Safety takes centre stage with Hayleys Fentons’ installation of a sophisticated Fire Protection and Detection System. Programmable with addressability features, this system ensures precise fire location detection, facilitating swift evacuation in emergencies. Seamlessly integrated with the fireman intercom and PA system, all controlled from a single panel, this setup promises utmost safety and efficiency.

Vallibel Finance PLC, Executive Director Sisira Weerabahu says: “We commend Hayleys Fentons expertise and collaborative approach, which ensured a smooth project execution, even amidst challenges like the fast-track schedule, limited material storage space on-site and external constraints. We believe the MEP systems will foster a comfortable, efficient, and productive work environment.”

Hayleys Fentons also provided a specialised installation of three 160-ton chillers seamlessly integrated into the CMS. The CMS is commonly used to monitor HVAC and climate control systems in high-rise buildings. Hayleys Fenton’s design incorporates smart technology, which can reduce energy consumption by monitoring the building’s climate. Electrical systems were designed to minimise energy waste during maintenance and provide efficient power distribution throughout the building. With independent distribution boards on each office floor, flexibility in space allocation becomes seamless, enhancing operational efficiency.

Hayleys Fentons Managing Director Hasith Prematillake, elaborates: “At Hayleys Fentons, we engineer innovative and sustainable services that prioritise well-being and contribute to a better quality of life. For Vallibel Finance’s new office building, we built the foundation for a comfortable, efficient, and productive work environment that functions seamlessly for the people using the building. This ability to translate plans into functional spaces is what truly motivates us, and this project is a great example of that idea in action.”

With the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, several challenges arose to deliver this project on time. With stringent health and safety protocols and strategies to mitigate high inflation rates and material scarcity, Hayleys Fentons ensured the timely delivery of critical imported materials despite import restrictions and foreign currency limitations. Their specialised and experienced in-house supply chain department adeptly handled the logistics from producers to the site, ensuring seamless material flow throughout the project lifecycle. “We are proud to have been a part of this landmark project for Vallibel Finance PLC,” says Hayleys Fentons Ltd. Chief Executive Officer Sujith De Alwis. “Our team’s dedication and expertise were instrumental in overcoming project challenges, delivering solutions that meets the building’s specific needs.

We are confident that this system will provide long-term value and efficiency for the stakeholders.”

To learn more about this project or to find additional information on the MEP services offered by Hayleys Fentons, please visit www.hayleysfentons.com.