Race to semis: Qualification scenarios at T20WC 2026

ICC - With three rounds of matches completed for each team at the ICC Women's T20 World Cup 2026, the race for the semi-finals is heating up.

Hosts England, Australia, India and West Indies are unbeaten so far and find themselves in pole position to progress. Here we look at the qualification scenarios for all 12 competing teams.

Six-time champions Australia have stamped their class on the tournament with three dominating wins. They began their campaign with a 65-run win over 2024 finalists South Africa in a key clash.

Since then, Australia have picked up a nine-wicket win over Bangladesh and defeated tournament debutants Netherlands by 98 runs. A win over either Pakistan or India, in their last two group games, should be enough to see them through.

The reigning ICC Women's Cricket World Cup champions began their campaign at the T20 World Cup with comprehensive wins over Pakistan and the Netherlands by 64 and 95 runs, respectively.

In their third game, India's power-packed batting line-up came up short against South Africa. An inspired unbeaten half-century by Marizanne Kapp took the game away from India. South Africa beat India by six wickets to throw Group A open.

India will look to secure wins against Bangladesh and Australia to seal their spot in the semi-final, for another defeat would result in an exit if South Africa win their remaining matches in Group A.

Finalists in the last two editions of the T20 World Cup, South Africa's campaign began with a forgettable 65-run defeat against Australia.

They struggled against Pakistan in the second game, but just got over the line in a two-wicket win.

Marizanne Kapp then put on a stellar display to guide them to a six-wicket win over India to draw them level on points against the Harmanpreet Kaur-led team, but with a weaker net run-rate.

Their fate is still potentially in their hands, but they will need to make sure they beat the Netherlands and Bangladesh heavily to improve their NRR, just in case India wins their remaining group stage fixtures as well.

Two battling wins, on either side of the nine-wicket loss to Australia, have kept Bangladesh in the hunt. They opened with a six-wicket win over Netherlands and their stunning win over Pakistan will give them confidence.

After posting a total of 123/6, Bangladesh spinners Sanjida Akter Meghla and Nahida Akter grabbed three wickets each to restrict Pakistan to 100/8. The road gets tougher for Bangladesh as they take on India and South Africa next.

Pakistan's race is run with three defeats in as many matches. Though captain Fatima Sana has dazzled with the bat and ball, she hasn't always found enough support from the team.

They opened the campaign with a 64-run defeat to arch-rivals India. Sana's all-round show almost led them to an unlikely victory against South Africa, but they eventually went down by two wickets. Pakistan had their chance against Bangladesh too before they bungled the chase, slipping from 49/1 to 84/8 to lose by 23 runs.

Sana's team only has pride to play for in the next two games against Australia and Netherlands.

Netherlands have impressed with their spirit on their Women's T20 World Cup debut. The campaign began with a six-wicket loss to Bangladesh, followed by heavy 95 and 98-run defeats to India and Australia, respectively.

They take on South Africa next, followed by their last match of the tournament against Pakistan.

Hosts England have had a few scares in their first three games, but their wealth of talent and experience has always taken the team through with relative ease.

They started their campaign with a comprehensive 87-run win over Sri Lanka, followed it up with a four-wicket win over Ireland and then restricted a spirited Scotland for a 38-run win. They need at least one win in their next two matches, against former champions West Indies and defending champions New Zealand, to secure their semi-final spot.

2016 champions West Indies began their tournament with a statement seven-wicket win over defending champions New Zealand, but the momentum has dropped since then.

They struggled with the bat in their next two games, but found solutions in key moments to beat Scotland by seven runs and Sri Lanka by five wickets. With three wins from three, Hayley Matthews' team needs just a win to progress.

The defending champions are in danger of crashing out in the group stage after losing their first two matches of the tournament. After a seven-wicket defeat to West Indies, they were upset by Sri Lanka.

Melie Kerr's team survived a major scare as a spirited Irish side got within touching distance, only for Melie herself to strike with crucial wickets at the right time for a four-run win. The White Ferns' fate is not entirely in their own hands, but they have to win the next two matches, against Scotland and England, to give themselves a chance.

Scotland defeated Ireland by 40 runs to make a brilliant start to the tournament. They had their moments in the next two matches as well but haven't managed to win.

After restricting West Indies to 153/6, Scotland's spirited chase fell short by seven runs. Chasing 201 against England, they made a strong start but eventually finished at 162/7. With Sri Lanka and New Zealand now lying in wait, Scotland have their task cut out.

It has been a mixed bag for Sri Lanka. While they suffered a heavy defeat against England in the tournament opener, they responded brilliantly with a five-wicket win over defending champions New Zealand.

They recovered from 55/4 to overhaul the target of 151 in the final over. Batting let them down against the West Indies as they crashed to a five-wicket defeat. They will hang on to the glimmer of hope to make the semis with games against Ireland and Scotland still to go.

Competing in their fifth T20 World Cup, Ireland are yet to win a match at the tournament. But they have come agonisingly close.

Their campaign began with a 40-run defeat against Scotland, but they put England under tremendous pressure despite the four-wicket loss, before almost causing the upset of the tournament against New Zealand.

Chasing 140, the Irish were in control but for some late wickets that stopped their momentum, as they lost by four runs. With three defeats, they are out of contention for a spot in the semi-finals.