President calls on opposition to help safeguard Sri Lanka’s agreement with IMF

President Ranil Wickremesinghe called upon the Janatha Vimukthi Peramuna (JVP), the Samagi Jana Balavegaya (SJB) and other political parties to extend their support to the government in safeguarding the agreements forged with the International Monetary Fund (IMF).

Addressing the United National Party’s (UNP) May Day rally held in Colombo, Wickremesinghe revealed that he will table in the parliament a law which is inclusive of the agreements that the government has reached with the IMF. Thus, he requested all the parties to support in passing the law in order to continue to safeguard the current stable situation that the country has acquired.

“I will table in the parliament a law which is inclusive of the agreements we’ve reached with the IMF. I request everyone to support me in that”, the President said.

Furthermore, the Head of the State mentioned that his request is not only to safeguard the stability that the country has acquired, but also to transform the country’s economy into an export-oriented economy.

Commenting further Wickremesinghe said: “We should modernize the economy of the villages in order to eliminate poverty. We have already commenced that programme.  I will create a strong export-oriented economy and bring forward a proper method of creating a better future for the youth of this country.”

“So I request the SJB and the JVP not to remain in the traditional politics but to join hands to safeguard the economy and to create a better future for the youth of this country”, he added.

Meanwhile, the President also took note of certain criticisms levelled against him in the political arena.

“Now today, different parties hold rallies and processions around Colombo city. SLPP is in the Campbell Park, SJB is holding a rally at Chatham Street, [Palani] Digambaram is in Thalawakele, the CWC [Ceylon Workers’ Congress] is holding their rally in Kotagala, JVP is in Jaffna...”

“This is the democracy I’ve created [in the country]. Everyone can hold rallies, and they can even criticize me. This situation was not prevalent in the country 02 years ago”, the President expressed.

“At one point the Opposition Leader was attacked in the Galle Face Green and chased away [during a rally]. Today, we have given him the space at Chatham Street. Isn’t this democracy?” he inquired.

Meanwhile, President Wickremesinghe expressed his gratitude to every political party which supported in strengthening the country’s economy.

“I express my gratitude to each and every party who supported me in building up the country to this state again. Members from the SLPP, a group from the SLFP [Sri Lanka Freedom Party], Douglas Devananda, the CWC and several others joined hands with me”, the President said.

“We reached this point in a harder way. Now we have to decide whether to continue this situation or to go back to the 2022.”

“I invite the other parties, the SJB, the JVP not to oppose this, but to reach an agreement with the government to safeguard this situation for the people.”