EO Sri Lanka begins new chapter under President Abeetha Perera

EO Sri Lanka President and Board of Directors (from left); President Abeetha Perera, Umayanga Nanayakkara, Imran Akbarally, Sujan Suresh, Tarusha Weerasooria, Shanika Arsecularatne, Shanjeeve Sriskandarajah, Humaid Khalid, Losini Gajendran, Divek Amrith, Chirath Devasurendra, Chathura Samarasinghe and Chamindra Gamage

EO Sri Lanka officially welcomed the 2026–27 EO year on 1 July 2026 as the chapter ushered in a new era of leadership under President of W. A. Perera & Co. Ltd., (WAPCO) Director Abeetha Perera and his newly appointed Board of Directors.

The ceremonial handover saw the presidency baton passed from of Stafford Motor Company Executive Director Tarindra Kaluperuma, symbolising a seamless transition and the beginning of another exciting chapter for Sri Lanka’s entrepreneurial community.

Having successfully led the chapter through a year Beyond Borders & Beyond Limits, Tarindra Kaluperuma concluded his tenure by entrusting the leadership of the chapter to Abeetha Perera, whose vision for the year is captured in the theme “Beyond the Edge” — an invitation to practice Conscious Leadership and turn it into Transformational Action.

The theme reflects a commitment to developing entrepreneurs who lead with intention, self-awareness, and purpose while inspiring meaningful transformation within their organisations and communities. It challenges members to think beyond conventional boundaries, embrace innovation, and pursue growth with courage, resilience, and authenticity.

Supporting President Abeetha Perera is a dynamic Board of Directors, bringing together accomplished entrepreneurs and business leaders from diverse industries. The Board comprises Asset Engineering Ltd., Managing Director Umayanga Nanayakkara as Forum Chair, Akbar Brothers Exports Ltd., Executive Director Imran Akbarally as Learning Chair, Varna Ltd., Managing Director Chamindra Gamage as Governance Chair, Melwire Lanka Ltd., Director Divek Amrith as Member Engagement Chair, ARRC Capital Ltd., Director Chirath Devasurendra as Marketing and Communications Chair, Finco Holdings Ltd., Director Tarusha Weerasooria as Finance Chair, Raseeka Impex Director Humaid Khalid as Strategic Alliance Chair, Gajma & Co. Principal Losini Gajendran as Membership Chair, Christell Luxury Wellness CEO and Medical Director Shanika Arsecularatne as Women of EO Chair, ZILLIONe Director Sujan Suresh as GSEA Chair, Kala Group Managing Director Shanjeeve Sriskandarajah as Retreat Chair, and  A.P.S Knitters Ltd., Managing Director Chathura Samarasinghe as MyEO Chair.

EO Sri Lanka said it continues to serve as a trusted platform where entrepreneurs can openly exchange experiences, gain new perspectives, and build lifelong relationships with fellow business leaders. As the country’s entrepreneurial landscape continues to evolve, the chapter remains dedicated to fostering collaboration, innovation, and continuous learning while equipping members to navigate the opportunities and challenges of modern business.

With President Abeetha Perera and his Board of Directors at the helm, EO Sri Lanka enters the 2026–27 year with renewed purpose and ambition and the chapter looks forward to inspiring entrepreneurs to embrace transformational change, lead consciously, and venture Beyond the Edge—creating stronger leaders, stronger businesses, and a stronger entrepreneurial ecosystem for Sri Lanka.