David Pieris Renewable Energy opens head office in Pelawatte

A significant milestone was achieved in Sri Lanka’s sustainable energy landscape and the David Pieris Group with the inauguration of the new head office of David Pieris Renewable Energy (Private) Limited.

Strategically situated at No. 734B, New Parliament Road, Pelawatta, Battaramulla, the new office was opened by Rohana Dissanayake, Group Chairman and Managing Director, David Pieris Group of Companies along with the board directors of David Pieris Renewable Energy and directors of Group companies. This short and simple ceremony was attended by representatives from the Sustainable Energy Authority, customers, and other internal and external stakeholders.

In August 2022, the David Pieris Group ventured into the solar space and specialised in providing tailormade solar energy solutions under the brand David Pieris Solar Energy. Within just a year of operations and having installed more than 1.5 megawatts worth of solutions including undertaking a 620KW project in Ranna, they have established a strong foundation within the solar energy space. In 2024, the David Pieris Renewable Energy (Pvt) Ltd (DPRE) was incorporated to ensure even greater focus and with the opening its new office they are geared to expand their portfolio and accelerate their growth.

“The inauguration our new office symbolizes the next chapter in our journey in the green energy space” stated Naalaka Madugalle, Director, David Pieris Renewable Energy (Pvt) Ltd. “We will build on the enduring trust and reputation of the David Pieris brand, along with our extensive island-wide network, to ensure customers throughout the island have access to top-tier solar solutions, backed by exceptional customer service and comprehensive after-sales support. Renewable energy is the future, and we are committed to doing our bit for a greener, cleaner, sustainable Sri Lanka for future generations”, Madugalle stressed.

Toastmaster Bhathiya Hettiarachchi, appointed ‘Club Growth Director’ for District 82

Sri Lanka Insurance awarded the Most Loved Life Insurance Brand of 2024

David Pieris launches Pearl Bay – a unique leisure destination

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.