Gabriel’s Charity Auction in aid of Rescue Animals Sri Lanka

Front row (from left): Co-host Vrai Raymond, Designer and Choreographer Brian Kerkoven, Headlines PR and Events Chairman and RAS Founding Trustee Anusha David, Cinnamon Grand Director – Events/Sales Dini Isaacs,  Hi Magazine Editor Shyamalee Tudawe,  Designer Charini Suriyage, Cinnamon Grand General Manager Nazoomi Azhar, Cinnamon Hotels and Resorts Chief Operating Officer Kamal Munasinghe

Second row (from left): Ashok Ferrey, Designer Dhammika Amarasekere, Julianne Ephraums (RAS), Upeckha Cumaratunga (Gravitas), Designer Jaishri Jayasinghe.

Third row (from left):  Cinnamon Grand Executive Chef Kapila Jayasinghe, Hair and Make up Partner Chagall Chairman Gerald Solomons, Designer Kamil Hewavitharane, Presenting Partner of the Auction Aditi, Managing Director Mahika Weerakoon, Headlines/RAS Upul Wijenayake, and Akry Ameer (RAS)

Gabriel’s Charity Auction in aid of Rescue Animals Sri Lanka (RAS) will take place on 31 October at the Mahogany, Cinnamon Grand, commencing 7.30 p.m.

Presented by the Cinnamon Grand, Hi Magazine, Wijeya Newspapers and Aditi, the evening is guaranteed to have something for everyone.  A silent auction featuring an array of valuable items, a fashion show with Sri Lanka’s finest designers namely, Aditi, Brian Kerkoven, Charini, Dhammika Amarasekara, Jai by Aashkii, LIMAK by KAMIL and RADISI, while cocktails, a four course sit down dinner, and entertainment by En Route, all combine to ensure that Friday 31 October, will indeed be a night to remember .

The Auction will comprise of a variety of eclectic items including paintings, pottery, designer clothing, jewellery, etc. with the proceeds from their sale going towards funding the RAS shelter, as well as their manifold activities.

RAS was incorporated as a formal trust by D L & F de Sarams over 25 years ago by Anusha David, who commenced her animal welfare activities at the age of eight  when she picked up two flea ridden pups on her way to school and hid them in her class handwork cupboard. Since then Anusha’s care for the voiceless encompasses all creatures great and small and her advocacy extends to farm animals, elephants, monkeys, birds and reptiles. The RAS shelter presently houses 92 dogs and 18 cats with three staff on site to care for the animals.

Lanka IOC, which has partnered with RAS as part of their CSR program, give a strong signal to other corporates to follow their lead, while Aditi emphasised the fact that animal welfare and preserving the environment are the cornerstones of CSR.

Hospitality Partner Cinnamon Grand, has walked their talk with the opening of a Cattery, while  Print Media partner Wijeya Newspapers Ltd., Advertising Partner Gravitas, Social Media Partner Zelus, Brian Kerkoven, Chagall Salon, and En Route, have all extended their support to RAS to ensure the event’s success.

Aditi Managing Director Mahika Weerakoon, who was the first Corporate to partner with RAS, said,

“At Aditi, our philosophy has always been about care for people, for communities, and for the world we live in. Supporting Rescue Animals Sri Lanka is a natural extension of our values. Just as we empower women through fashion, we believe compassion towards animals and protecting the environment are essential to building a truly elegant society.”

Lanka IOC Managing Director Dipak Das said they were pleased to partner with Rescue Animals Sri Lanka as part of their CSR initiative and expressed the hope that other Sri Lankan Corporates would include Animal Welfare into their corporate ethos.”

“The Cinnamon Grand Colombo is delighted to be a part of yet another initiative spearheaded by Anusha David of Rescue Animals Sri Lanka. We have had a long association with Anusha and look forward to partnering with her on future endeavours too,” said General Manager Nazoomi Azhar.