President Ranil congratulates Modi on election win

Sri Lankan President Ranil Wickremesinghe joined world leaders on Tuesday in congratulating Indian Prime Minister Narendra Modi on his and Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP)-led National Democratic Alliance’s (NDA) third consecutive victory in the Lok Sabha elections.

“I extend my warmest felicitations to the BJP led NDA on its victory, demonstrating the confidence of the Indian people in the progress and prosperity under the leadership of PM Narendra Modi,” he said in a post on ‘X’ (formerly Tiwtter).

“As the closest neighbour, Sri Lanka looks forward to further strengthening the partnership with India,” Wickremesinghe said.

Vote counting is still underway in India’s 2024 Lok Sabha election. Prime Minister Narendra Modi‘s Bharatiya Janata Party and its National Democratic Alliance has yet to secure the 272 seats needed for a parliamentary majority, but the prime minister has declared “a very big win.”

Modi, 73, is only the second Indian prime minister to win a third straight term.

As Narendra Modi claimed victory for his alliance, congratulations from neighbors began rolling in on X despite the National Democratic Alliance having several seats to win before securing a majority.

Nepalese Prime Minister Pushpa Kamal Dahal: “Congratulations to PM @narendramodi on the electoral success of BJP and NDA in the Loksabha elections for the third consecutive term. We are happy to note the successful completion of the world’s largest democratic exercise with enthusiastic participation of the people of India.”

Bhutanese Prime Minister Tshering Tobgay: “Congratulations to my friend PM @narendramodi ji and NDA for the historic 3rd consecutive win in the world’s biggest elections. As he continues to lead Bharat to great heights, I look forward to working closely with him to further strengthen the relations between our 2 countries.”

Mauritian Prime Minister Pravind Kumar Jugnauth: “Congratulations Prime Minister Modi Ji @narendramodi on your laudable victory for a historic third term.

Under your helm, the largest democracy will continue to achieve remarkable progress.

Sri Lankan President Ranil Wickremesinghe: I extend my warmest felicitations to the @BJP4India led NDA on its victory, demonstrating the confidence of the Indian people in the progress and prosperity under the leadership of PM @narendramodi. As the closest neighbour Sri Lanka looks forward to further strengthening the partnership with India.”