Sri Lanka president quips about parliamentary committee’s future amid speculation

ECONOMYNEXT — Amid speculation over the possibility of an early dissolution of parliament, President Ranil Wickremesinghe joked to opposition MP Harsha de Silva that the chairmanship of a parliamentary committee the latter heads may not last much longer.

Speaking in parliament Wednesday March 06 morning, MP de Silva asked President Wickremesinghe, who was present at the legislature, to discuss Sri Lanka’s plans for the restructure of external debt with all political parties represented in parliament.

“Restructuring of foreign debt is now going on. There’s only a few months left for the election. The next government will be obliged to continue the restructuring process. I propose to you that a consensus is reached with all parties that represent parliament upon some deliberation, because we can’t say for sure how long you’ll be there,” said de Silva.

“We expect to commence work under [incumbent opposition leader] Premadasa,” he added.

Responding to the main opposition Samagi Jana Balawegaya (SJB) MP’s request, President Wickremesinghe said: “Before the question of how long I’ll be there, how long you’ll be the chairman is the question.”

Wickremesinghe’s quip invited laughter from government MPs including Prime Minister Dinesh Gunawardena and State Minister of Finance Shehan Semasinghe.

MP de Silva chairs the parliamentary Committee on Public Finance (COPF).

“Champika Ranawaka also walked out,” Wickremesinghe added, referring to opposition MP Patali Champika Ranawaka who entered parliament on the SJB ticket but now sits independently in the opposition. Ranawaka recently presented a “common minimum programme” to both Wickremesinghe and senior members of the SJB, leading to intense speculation over his own ambitions.

“We agree that [debt restructuring] is something that impacts the whole country. After the initial discussion with the International Monetary Fund (IMF), I will convene party leaders. If there are alternative proposals, we’ll discuss them all with the IMF too, at the conclusion of which I will present a draft bill to parliament,” he said. (Colombo/Mar06/2024)