The PA in alliance with the JVP wins the 2004 general election

“JVP candidates in our alliance – though less known thn SLFPers – seemed to draw a substantial number of votes”

The patent lack of sincerity of the LTTE and the UNP’s failure to achieve success in its peace strategy was exposed by Lakshman Kadirgamar. He was particularly concerned about the LTTE’s plan to capture Trincomalee by encircling this vital port. At first LK warned Ranil confidentially of this perilous situation on the instructions of CBK. But since that was of no avail we decided to go public at my weekly press conference.

The authorized biography of CBK describes this situation thus; “Although the LTTE had finally dropped its unrealistic demand for an independent Tamil state, Wickremesinghe had begun negotiating the finer points of a more open federal structure with the group. To some it was an arrangement that increasingly seemed to promise nothing less than the independent state the LTTE always wanted. It was an issue that continued to divide the President and Prime Minister. On December 4, 2003 CBK decided to rein in the process. She dismissed the Ministers of Defence, Interior and Information bringing their portfolios under her charge, suspending Parliament and then one day later declaring a state of emergency”.

Though some in the UNP thought that there would be blood on the streets Ranil acquiesced in this situation. Cabinet meetings continued for several months more in this tense manner. With DM Jayaratne being the nominal Minister of Information I interacted closely with Rupavahini and started a weekly programme discussing global and local news with Chandrasekera, a popular programme specialist, as the host.

Many viewers were intrigued that a former Minister could discuss important issues weekly on TV amidst growing antipathy between the two parties then in “cohabitation”. During this period Ranil encouraged Mahinda Rajapaksa to establish his own credentials as a way of undercutting CBK. The latter was afforded special protocol recognition and facilities for travel, including helicopter rides, while CBK could only watch with horror. Her attempt to retain Ratnasiri as Leader of the Opposition failed because the UNP had used members of his family to persuade him to immediately leave for Bangkok so that he was not available for selection.

His state of mind was so confused that he sent a letter of resignation to CBK and left for Bangkok without meeting her and even without leaving his address in Bangkok fearing that he would be asked to change his mind. Now Ranil and Mahinda were on the same page and she was left feeling betrayed and alone.

Both sides knew that a general election was near. It was declared to be held on April 2, 2004. The PA contested it in an alliance with the JVP under the banner of United People’s Freedom Alliance [UPFA]. To coordinate our publicity campaign Mano Tittawella, Mangala, LK, myself and Tara de Mel were appointed by CBK. Triad – a new trail blazing advertising company well known for its thinking out of the box, was entrusted with the professional aspects of the campaign and they launched the “Rata Perata” publicity programe which was a tremendous success.

Dilith Jayaweera led the Triad team. Tissa Abeysekera made several effective one minute ads with the title “Who is responsible?” focusing on corruption and mismanagement by the UNP administration. Our campaign was coordinated with the JVP through Wimal Weerawansa who was their information chief. From the beginning we were on a roll drawing large crowds and getting the support of the local media.

One noteworthy observation was that the JVP candidates in our alliance seemed to draw a substantial number of votes even though they were hardly known in their electorates when compared to our candidates. They were heading for winning a record number of seats. We ran an effective campaign based on criticizing the “elitism” of the UNP and its leader. On the other hand the UNP presented itself as the “peace party”. But we were able to engineer a splendid victory.

The all island results of the 2004 election were as follows:

In the Kandy district the distribution of seats were as follows; UPFA [6]; UNF [5]; JHU [1].

The successful candidates from the SLFP within the UPFA [excluding the JVP] were as follows:

Again in this election I had improved on my earlier performance though not in such large margins as in earlier elections. There was little doubt that JVP had eaten into the SLFP vote base in the UPFA. Throughout the country unknown JVP candidates headed the UPFA list even over veterans like Jayaratne who had staked claims to be PM according to party seniority. It was in this back ground that CBK began to make the new Cabinet which was for the first time to have a substantial input from the JVP.

Even at the beginning there were misunderstandings. While the Cabinet was to comprise of 31 ministers of whom four were from the JVP [Equally there were to be 31 Deputy Ministers of whom four were from the JVP] a controversy arose over the powers of the Mahaweli Minister Maithripala Sirisena vis-a-vis the JVP’s Agriculture Minister Anura Kumara Dissanayake.

In a show of strength the JVP boycotted the swearing in of the Cabinet on April 6. However after frantic negotiations a satisfactory solution was found and they took their oaths on April 9 thereby beginning a new chapter in Sri Lankan politics. The JVP Ministers were AKD [Agriculture], Vijitha Herath [Culture], Lal Kantha [Small Industries] and Wijesinghe [Fisheries].

By a noteworthy coincidence this was very much like the allocation of ministries in a power sharing arrangement that President Premadasa had offered the JVP if they would call off their violence at the beginning of his tenure. Another significant feature was that I was appointed the new Minister of Finance in the CBK cabinet. Lakshman Kadirgamar was reappointed as Minister of External Affairs. In parliamentary tradition the two key cabinet positions are Finance and External affairs.

The Architect of Minds – An Exclusive Interview with Professor Elsie Kothelawala on the Legacy of Professor J. E. Jayasuriya

My cricketing joke on jogging track won me view of private cricket museum

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.