ComBank makes history as first bank in Sri Lanka to enable Google Pay for Mastercard cardholders

The Commercial Bank of Ceylon has reaffirmed its leadership in technology, innovation and the delivery of the most advanced banking experiences to customers by reaching another milestone in Sri Lanka’s digital payment landscape with the introduction of Google Pay support for its Mastercard debit and credit cardholders, in collaboration with Mastercard and Google.

With this launch, Commercial Bank-issued Mastercard debit and credit cardholders can now add their cards to Google Pay payment app and make secure, contactless tap & go transactions using NFC-enabled Android smartphones. Customers can transact seamlessly at contactless-enabled Point-of-Sale terminals across Sri Lanka and at any location globally where Mastercard is accepted, eliminating the need to carry physical cards.

The solution leverages advanced tokenisation technology to safeguard every transaction. Actual card numbers are replaced with secure digital tokens, ensuring that sensitive card details are neither shared with merchants nor stored on devices. Each card is authenticated through one-time passwords or bank verification, delivering a payment experience that combines global standards of security with everyday convenience.

Designed for a wide range of use cases including groceries, dining, commuting, in-store and online payments, Google Pay offers Commercial Bank customers a faster, safer and more intuitive way to pay, aligned with the evolving digital lifestyles of Sri Lankans.

Commenting on the launch, Mr Sanath Manatunge, Managing Director/CEO of Commercial Bank said: “Launching Google Pay in Sri Lanka for the first time, and extending it to our Mastercard cardholders, underscores our determination to bring world-class digital payment solutions to our customers without compromise on security or reliability. This initiative strengthens our role as a catalyst for digital adoption in Sri Lanka, while giving our customers the freedom to transact globally with confidence, speed and simplicity. At Commercial Bank, digital innovation is not about novelty; it is about delivering practical, secure solutions that enhance convenience in everyday life of our customers and move the country’s financial ecosystem forward.”

Mr Sandun Hapugoda, Country Manager – Sri Lanka & Maldives at Mastercard, said: “This initiative introduces a new level of security, convenience and choice for Commercial Bank customers and Mastercard cardholders. By simply adding their cards to Google Pay, cardholders can Tap & Go locally and globally with confidence. Tokenisation protects card credentials end to end, ensuring every transaction is secure and accepted seamlessly across more than 210 countries and territories. Moreover, every contactless Mastercard transaction made in Sri Lanka will contribute to the construction of the Trail Cancer Hospital. This collaboration demonstrates how digital payments can extend beyond everyday utility to create lasting social impact, reflecting Mastercard’s commitment to Doing Well by Doing Good.”

Strategically, the launch of Google Pay with Mastercard underscores Commercial Bank’s long-standing commitment to digital innovation, customer security and convenience, while actively supporting Sri Lanka’s transition towards a cashless and digitally enabled economy. It is also expected to accelerate the adoption of touchless payments nationwide and contribute meaningfully to national digital economy initiatives, the Bank said.

With this latest first, Commercial Bank continues to set new benchmarks in Sri Lanka’s banking sector, reaffirming its leadership in delivering globally aligned digital payment solutions that are secure, convenient and future-ready.

Keells Nexus introduces an all new Loyalty App, marking a new era of connected, everyday rewards

Mild Earth to take Sri Lankan spices to global stage with ‘Wild Mist Water’

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.