A juggernaut careening menacingly downhill

The JVP-NPP government’s desperation to increase the retirement ages of judges apparently knows no bounds. Yesterday, Minister of Justice and National Integration Harshana Nanayakkara and Minister of Health and Mass Media Dr. Nalinda Jayatissa visited Mahanayake of the Malwatta Chapter Most Venerable Thibbotuwawe Sri Sumangala Thera and briefed him on their plan. When the prelate said it was popularly thought that the government move was intended to benefit one particular judge, Minister Nanayakkara assured him that there was no truth in that claim.

Minister Nanayakkara’s assurance to the prelate reminds us of what Maithripala Sirisena told a group of senior Buddhist monks during a religious ceremony at Temple Trees almost on the eve of his exit from the Mahinda Rajapaksa government in late 2014 to contest the 2015 presidential election. A famous monk asked Sirisena whether there was any truth in rumours that he would defect to contest as the Opposition’s common presidential candidate. The latter categorically stated he would never do so. But he decamped soon afterwards, and the rest is history. So much for politicians’ assurances to the members of the Maha Sangha and other religious leaders.

There is no way the government can dupe the discerning public into buying into its claim that the move to raise the judges’ retirement ages is devoid of an ulterior motive and aimed at clearing a huge backlog of court cases. The government has had to abandon its Plan A and is now trying to implement its Plan B. Plan A was to raise the retirement ages of the judges of the Supreme Court and the Court of Appeal. It would rather have increased only the Supreme Court judges’ retirement ages, but such a move would have made its true intention obvious. It therefore dragged the Court of Appeal into the scheme as well. Now, it is reportedly trying to create a bigger mess by raising the retirement ages of all judges in a bid to mask its motive.

Perhaps, there is only one way for the government to prove its claim that its real intention is not to retain one particular judge by increasing the retirement ages of judges. It should delay the presentation of its controversial constitutional amendment to Parliament until January 2027. The judge concerned is scheduled to retire before the end of 2026, according to the Opposition and lawyers’ associations.

However, the best way out is for the government to introduce the new Constitution it has promised in its election manifesto, A Thriving Nation: A Beautiful life. Among other pledges in its manifesto is “abolishing the executive presidency and appointing a president, without executive powers by the parliament”. So, instead of introducing piecemeal constitutional amendments, the government ought to concentrate on replacing the existing Constitution with a new one and abolishing the executive presidency, which the JVP vehemently opposed while out of power.

It will be a mistake for the government to try to railroad dissenters into submission and act according to its whims and fancies. Popular mandates are temporary. The Gotabaya Rajapaksa government also had a two-thirds majority and introduced a constitutional amendment, enabling Basil Rajapaksa to return to Parliament. In 2022, people took to the streets and President Rajapaksa and his family members in the Cabinet had to resign.

Meanwhile, it is not only the Executive and the Legislature that incur public opprobrium and provoke protests; the Judiciary too does so at times. The EU Agency for Asylum has described the 5 June 2024 High Court judgment in Bangladesh as the trigger for nationwide student-led protests, which eventually continued until early August and contributed to the Prime Minister Sheikh Hasina government’s resignation. It was a judge’s remark that led to the birth of India’s online Cockroach Janata Party, which organised a mass uprising, humbling the powerful Modi government recently. One may recall that on 15 May, 2026, during a Supreme Court hearing, Chief Justice Surya Kant reportedly likened some unemployed Indian youngsters to “cockroaches”. Thus, the words and actions of judges are not without adverse consequences. In this country, the appointment of Chief Justice Mohan Peiris lacked legitimacy, tarnished the image of the judiciary and irked the public as it was the result of a sordid political move by the Mahinda Rajapaksa government to further its interests by ousting Chief Justice Shirani Bandaranayake. He was sacked unceremoniously immediately after the 2015 regime change. Peiris should have known better than to be used by the Rajapaksa government. This is something the proponents of the current dispensation’s political skulduggery ought to take cognisance of.

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.