SLT-Mobitel unveils 2025 calendar featuring dragonflies of Sri Lanka

Continuing the tradition of celebrating Sri Lanka’s natural heritage, SLT-Mobitel has unveiled the 2025 calendar themed ‘Dragonflies of Sri Lanka,’ focusing on the fascinating world of dragonflies. The calendar highlights the captivating beauty and ecological significance of these vibrant insects, emphasising the vital role they play in sustaining healthy ecosystems in the country.

Dragonflies, often referred to as ‘Guardians of the Watersheds’, are apex predators among invertebrate communities and serve as indicators of water quality and ecosystem health and considered as a flagship group of insects in the conservation movement. They are generally familiar to the wider public due to their colourfulness, relatively large size compared to most other insects, flight capabilities and presence around human modified landscapes.

With over 132 species in Sri Lanka, including 59 endemic species, the SLT-Mobitel 2025 calendar unveiled the unique diversity of 13 dragonflies while creating awareness of their importance in conservation efforts. Moreover, they have been artistically portrayed to emphasise their ecological significance and stunning beauty.

SLT-Mobitel Chief Marketing Officer Prabhath Dahanayake, said, “As a purpose-driven national brand, SLT-Mobitel goes beyond connecting people digitally. The company is also dedicated to encouraging our valued customers to appreciate nature. The 2025 calendar presents the beauty and ecological importance of dragonflies, aiming to inspire a deeper appreciation for the biodiversity that is part of Sri Lanka’s heritage. Through this initiative, we hope to spark conversations about conservation and sustainability, aligning with SLT-Mobitel’s commitment to environmental stewardship.”

SLT-Mobitel’s 2025 calendar features 13 stunning illustrations, capturing the vibrant hues and dynamic appearance of dragonflies across various Sri Lankan habitats. Each month is a visual journey, describing the intricate life cycle and ecological role of dragonflies, found from the coastal belt to the mountain peaks. These carefully depicted visuals by talented artists Pulasthi Ediriweera, Parami Vidyarathna, and Udeshika Priyadarshani on the dragonflies’ beauty and serve as a reminder of their role in maintaining the delicate ecosystem balance. Amila Sumanapala was the resource person who supported the project and is recognised as a renowned field researcher at the Department of Zoology and Environment Science, University of Colombo.

For 19 years, SLT-Mobitel’s annual calendars have served as a platform to showcase the richness of Sri Lanka’s environment and culture, inspiring a collective responsibility for preservation. With the Dragonflies of Sri Lanka 2025 calendar symbolising resilience and environmental harmony, SLT-Mobitel continues to raise awareness about protecting Sri Lanka’s natural heritage.