Is the govt. higher up considering inviting Opposition MPs?

Colombo, May 18 (Daily Mirror) - Following months of speculation of arguments and rifts within the NPP camp, the Daily Mirror reliably learns that some senior government members have told President Anura Kumara Dissanayake to consider inviting capable parliamentarians from the opposition to join the government in an attempt to take the nation forward.

Inside sources told the Daily Mirror that during a recent meeting at the JVP Headquarters in Pelawatta, the senior JVP camp had discussed a proposal where they should consider inviting some talented and capable parliamentarians from the opposition in order to assist the NPP in its decision making as well as tackling the weakening economy.

Some had even been of the view that the JVP’s one party ideology should now be changed and eventually the government should consider inviting more talent into the government from opposition parties.

However, the proposal was shot down by General Secretary of the JVP Tilvin Silva who said the JVP would and should continue on its one party stand and should not make any invitations at this moment. Tilvin’s answer was however argued by an opposing faction.

The matter had then escalated when Tilvin Silva, who presumably was angry at this point said that the government had somewhat become unpopular over Agriculture Minister K.D. Lalkantha’s house matter raised in the media to which Lalkantha had also argued back.

The situation had then escalated beyond control with some NPP MPs reportedly even ending up in some violent pushes.

It is reliably learnt that the President who had also been present to witness the whole situation had been of the view that the government should remain firm and its anti corruption policy will continue but had neither denied nor accepted the proposal that a national government should be considered.

The Daily Mirror learns that some MPs have already been approached by some senior government members to create a post for them to assist the government in some manner but some opposition MPs who were approached were shot down after they demanded for cabinet portfolios.

A senior source said that President Dissanayake’s vision to get the economy back on track and end the escalating corruption remains steadfast and if a decision is taken to team up with opposition members, then it will be for the betterment of the country which right now is suffering financially and amidst the government’s embarrassing fiasco of alleged hackers stealing from state coffers.

Sources also commending the President’s firm leadership said that President Dissanayake’s vision was open to accepting several proposals which would benefit the country and was also open to professionals providing their advise in tacking the challenges facing the economy.