Sri Lanka central bank to run out Treasury bills in few months

ECONOMYNEXT – Sri Lanka’s central bank has a “small amount” of Treasury bill left in its balance sheet and the agency will resort to other methods to conduct domestic operations, in the future, Central Bank Governor Nandalal Weerasinghe said.

The central bank’s bill stock will mature in the “next few months,” Assistant Governor Chandranath Amarasekera said.

“We will deal with it when we come to that. We have several tools, we have used in the past, even the statutory reserve ratio to absorb liquidity,” Amarasekera said.

“But right now based on our projections, there could be a gradual reduction in liquidity in the next few months of the year.”

The central bank ended up with over three trillion rupees of domestic assets in the process of injecting liquidity and triggering balance of payments deficits and forex shortages during the last currency crisis.

Some of the stock expansion was from maturing zero coupon bills after monetary stability was reached and the central bank stopped injecting liquidity to enforce a short-term policy rate.

In September last year, large volumes of bills were converted to low yielding long term bonds in a domestic debt re-structure to reduce near-term re-financing volumes under a Gross Financing Need requirement set by the IMF, triggering a large one-day loss.

It left the agency with a smaller portfolio of Treasury bills to absorb liquidity and re-build foreign reserves.

Governor Weerasinghe said it was too early to say whether the agency will begin to issue its own securities to absorb liquidity.

“There are several instruments. It is too early to say whether we will issue or not,” he said.

“Depending on the ability to buy securities from the market, if not there could be borrowing from the market, that can be used for open market operations.”

“There are different ways that we can do it. That we have done in the past also.”

The agency stopped issuing its own securities to build reserves about after the end of a civil war amid complaint from market participants about their liquidity and instead used borrowed securities and swaps.

However, the central bank in the near term also gets interest coupons for its low yielding Treasury bonds in cash.

“It is like any other coupons are paid … to the bondholders,” Governor Weerasinghe said. “It is the same process. It is no difference to the central bank.’

In 2023 the central bank re-structured 2,368 billion rupees of bills and 345 billion rupees of provisional advances into bills and bonds in a one-day loss on the fair value used.

The bonds will pay 12.4 percent until 2024 and 7.5 percent from 7.5 percent until 2026 and 5 percent until maturity.

Treasury bills valued at 208 billion rupees and bonds valued 1,804 billion rupees were shown in central bank accounts by end 2023.