Tata-DIMO-ChildFund implement humanitarian education support initiative

The Tata group, in partnership with ChildFund and DIMO, has successfully implemented a humanitarian education support initiative for the disaster-affected schoolchildren in Sri Lanka, reaffirming its commitment to helping communities recover from the impacts of Cyclone Ditwah and the subsequent floods.

Following a formal request for support from Sri Lanka, an on-ground assessment was conducted in December 2025. Recognising the urgent need, several Tata companies joined forces to implement the response programme.

As part of this initiative, the ‘Hope in a Backpack’ programme, which provides the disaster-affected children with essential educational supplies, was launched by the Tata group at Taj Samudra, Colombo, in the presence of the chief guest, Prime Minister Dr. Harini Amarasuriya, guest of honour, Indian High Commissioner Santhosh Jha, DIMO Chairman Ranjith Pandithage, Tata Sons Group Chief Sustainability Officer Chacko Thomas and ChildFund Country Director Aditi Ghosh.

This initiative is part of DIMO’s Social and Community Pillar, under the project theme ‘Lassana Hetak’, which focuses on giving the future generation a helping hand towards a better future.

This collective effort was further strengthened by volunteers from Tata and DIMO, who actively mobilised on the ground to pack, distribute and support the affected communities. During the proceedings, specially invited schoolchildren received the backpacks with the essential supplies as well.

Pandithage said, “We are honoured to support this humanitarian effort, which helps the children affected by the disaster return to school with confidence while supporting the continued recovery of communities across Sri Lanka.”

Thomas said, “At Tata, we believe that the community is not just another stakeholder in business but the very purpose of its existence, a philosophy envisioned by our founder, Jamsetji Tata. Guided by this principle, we are honoured to support the people of Sri Lanka, especially the children affected by Cyclone Ditwah, as they rebuild their lives.”