More excitement for Sri Lankans in Melbourne

Sri Lankans, Down Under, especially in Melbourne, are never short of entertainment. They have something exciting to look forward to, on a regular basis, and, invariably, it comes from Sri Lankan artistes…not domiciled in Australia.

Just recently we had the Gypsies who were involved in three ‘sold out’ concerts, in Perth, Sydney and Adelaide.

On Friday, 20th September, it was the turn of another popular Sri Lankan artiste to do the needful, in Australia – Melantha Perera.

He was featured at ‘Moratuwa Night’ held in Sydney, along with the band Redemption.

On 11th October, Melantha will be seen in action again, and this time in Melbourne, with the band Ebony, at the Walawwa (Sandown Regency).

Having built up a huge fan base, in Melbourne, Suzi Flückiger (better known as Suzi Croner in the local scene), is ready to give her fans another memorable happening.

Suzi is billed to appear at ‘Country Night’, scheduled for Saturday, 26th October, at The Grand On Princess.

Presented by St. John’s Past Pupils Association Inc, ‘Country Night’ will also feature No Limit and Esric, and the Hitch Hikers.

According to Suzi, her repertoire for ‘Country Night’ will be strictly country style music.

“Yes, that’s the theme of this event and I will be doing all country songs.”

She went on to say that she is looking forward to seeing all her friends, fans, schoolmates and country music lovers at ‘Country Night.’

“The last time I was in Australia, in October, 2023, I got to know so many lovely people and we had a great time at the concert, in Melbourne, and also during my stay in Melbourne.

“I’m looking forward to having a ball, once again, on 26th October, and then running around Melbourne with all my pals.

“And I’ve also got more surprises for music lovers in Melbourne…after ‘Country Night’”.

Suzi went on to say that she loves working for Bertie Ekenaike who is responsible for many of the big events being held in Melbourne and has been tagged Melbourne’s number one showbiz entrepreneur.

“It’s a pleasure performing at events organised by Bertie as he does everything in a very professional way.”

Sri Lankans remember Suzi, who now resides in Switzerland, as the upfront vocalist with the now-defunct Friends group.

She is very active in Zurich and has a heavy workload right throughout the week, where her singing is very much appreciated.

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.