Cabinet Decisions

MoU on Educational Cooperation between Sri Lankan and foreign Universities

The Cabinet of Ministers approved the proposal presented by the Prime Minister, as the Minister of Education, Higher Education, and Professional Education, to sign the MoU between Sri Lankan and the following foreign Universities, to establish Higher Education collaborations.

• MoU between the University of Kelaniya and Polcssky State University of the Republic of Belarus for the valid period of 5 years. • MoU between the University of Kelaniya and Vladimir State University of the Russian Federation for the valid period of 3 years. • MoU between the Department of Polymer Science, Faculty of Applied Science of the University of Sri Jayewardenepura, and the Petroleum and Petrochemical College of the Chulalongkom University of Thailand.

MoU on Agricultural Cooperation between Sri Lanka and Republic of Türkiye

Approval was granted at the Cabinet meeting held on 15-02-2021 to sign the MoU on Agricultural Cooperation between Sri Lanka and the Republic of Türkiye. Since the MoU has yet to be signed, the Cabinet of Ministers approved the proposal presented by the Minister of Agriculture, Livestock, Land, and Irrigation to obtain the approval of the current Cabinet of Ministers, to sign the aforementioned MoU.

Sri Lanka-Republic of the Philippines Agreement on mutual Legal Cooperation on Criminal matters

The Cabinet of Ministers approved the proposal presented by the Minister of Justice and National Integration to sign an Agreement on mutual Legal Cooperation in Criminal matters between the Philippines and Sri Lanka.

Sri Lanka-Republic of the Philippines Agreement on the Extradition of Sentenced persons

The Cabinet of Ministers has approved the proposal presented by the Minister of Justice and National Integration to sign the proposed Agreement and to ratify the aforementioned Agreement thereafter.

Approval of the Cabinet of Ministers was granted for the National Charter and National Policy on Senior Citizens of Sri Lanka in the year 2006. It has been identified that the National Charter and National Policy on Senior Citizens of 2006 should be updated. Accordingly, the Cabinet of Ministers has approved the proposal presented by the Minister of Rural Development, Social Protection, and Community Empowerment for the aforementioned National Policy.

Completing work on stalled sub-projects implemented in the “Nearest School is the Best School”

At the commencement of the year 2025, of the subprojects initiated under the aforementioned project, 29 projects were pending under the Ministry of Education, Higher Education, and Professional Education, and 3 projects were pending under the Provincial Department of Education. Accordingly, the Cabinet of Ministers approved the proposal presented by the Prime Minister, as the Minister of Education, Higher Education, and Professional Education, to recommence the remaining constructions that were started under the “Nearest School is the Best School” project on a priority basis in the years 2025, 2026, and 2027.

The Government obtained a loan of US$ 40 million from the OPEC Fund to develop a section of the road from Rakwana to Suriyakanda of the Galle-Deniyaya-Madampe Road, of which there is a balance of Rs. 1,000 million. It is intended to upgrade the section of the road from Kolonna to Suriyakanda ( 9.62 km), of the Embilipitiya-Panamura-Buluthota Road (B115) utilising the aforementioned balance.

Accordingly, the Cabinet of Ministers approved the proposal presented by the Minister of Transport, Highways, Ports and Civil Aviation to the aforementioned upgrade, and to fulfil the remaining financial requirement from the Government.

Renovation of road from Kottawa to Dodangoda of the Southern Expressway

The section of the road from Kottawa to Dodangoda on the Southern Expressway has not undergone any major repairs since opening to traffic in 2011. From the 5 Bids received, the Cabinet of Ministers has approved the proposal presented by the Minister of Transport, Highways, Ports, and Civil Aviation to award the relevant contract to M/s Access WKK Joint Venture, the lowest responsive Bidder, for the amount of Rs. 1,490.96 million, based on the recommendations of the Bid Evaluation Committee and the Highest Level Standing Procurement Committee.

Implementation of Phase I of the Consolidated Water Supply Project of Eppawala, Giribawa, Rajanganaya and Nochchiyagama

Initially it has been planned to cover 134 Grama Niladhari Divisions in 9 Divisional Secretariat Divisions under this project, the Eppawala, Giribawa, Rajanganaya and Nochchiyagama consolidated water supply project has been restructured as Phase I. Accordingly, the Cabinet of Ministers granted approval to the proposal submitted by the Minister of Urban Development, Construction and Housing to execute Phase I of the Consolidated Water Supply Project of Eppawala, Giribawa, Rajanganaya and Notchiagama within the period 2026 – 2029.

Supply of 2,200,000 vials of Biphasic Isophane Insulin injection (human) 30 % Soluble 70% Isophane

Of the 2 Bids received from the International competitive Bidding, the Cabinet of Ministers approved the proposal presented by the Minister of Health and Mass Media to award the contract for supply of 2,200,000 vials of Biphasic Isophane Insulin injection (human) 30 % Soluble 70% Isophane to the M/s M.J. Biopharm Pvt. Ltd in India, the lowest substantially responsive Bidder at a price of US$ 3.98 million.

Cost of Living Allowance for children under institutional protection or guardianship and street children

Approval of the Cabinet of Ministers was granted at their meeting held on 16.06.2025 to implement a programme to provide a cost of living allowance of Rs. 5,000/- for children under institutional protection or guardianship and the street children.

Accordingly, providing benefits of the said programme named as ‘Artha’ has been inaugurated from the month of July 2025. It has been observed that benefits of this programme can be provided with effect from the month of January 2025 so that the allocation of Rs 1,000 million for 2025 for ‘Artha’ programme can be fully utilized. Therefore, the proposal submitted by the Minister of Women and Child Affairs was approved by the Cabinet of Ministers to consider starting day of ‘Artha’ programme to be 01.01.2025 and to deposit the arrears benefits entitled from that day to the Accounts of children.

Approval has been granted on 11.08.2025, at the meeting of the Cabinet of Ministers, to introduce the new Micro Finance and Credit Regulation Authority Act. Clearance of the Attorney General has been received for the new Draft Bill prepared by the Legal Draftsman.

Approval of the Cabinet of Ministers has been granted to the resolution submitted by the President, as the Minister of Finance, Plan Implementation and Economic Development, to publish the said Micro Finance and Credit Regulation Draft Bill in the government gazette notification and thereafter, present the same to Parliament for its concurrence.