Turning an ecological threat into opportunity: ‘Hyacinthesis’ Accelerator kicks off

The Foundation For A Good Life (Guarantee) Limited (TFGL), in partnership with Good Life X (GLX), actively repositions the invasive Water Hyacinth via the lens of responsible management and utilisation to turn the environmental threat into a valuable regenerative raw material.

The Accelerator is supported through Scott Dunn’s ‘Partnership for Nature’ – a collaboration facilitated by the Conservation Collective, administered by the Lanka Environment Fund (LEF). Curated as an eight-month, market-driven programme was designed to transform Sri Lanka’s growing Water Hyacinth problem into a source of sustainable livelihoods and circular innovation.

While Sri Lanka is still in the early stages of adopting Water Hyacinth as a viable material, a diverse mix of artisans, entrepreneurs, and community-led innovators has been selected. This included already established enterprises utilising Water Hyacinth-based craft, as well as organisations working with similar natural raw materials that were yet to experiment with Water Hyacinth to explore new possibilities through craft, material innovation, and circular value chains.

Speaking on the initiative, Business Lead Expert, The Foundation For A Good Life (Guaranteed) Limited – Prabuddha Batuwatte, noted: “Cohort 1 of the accelerator programme is designed to work with enterprises and artisan communities across Sri Lanka. Aiding them in the development of market-ready handicrafts, fashion, and home décor items using Water Hyacinth as a primary material. With circularity in mind – the aim is to pair material innovation with structured business, design, and market support.”

Following a rigorous shortlisting process and diagnostic visits, six [06] Small and Medium Scale Enterprises (SMEs) from across the island have officially been onboarded (‘Cohort 1’) for the programme.

Cohort 1 of the accelerator programme is designed to work with enterprises and artisan communities across Sri Lanka to develop market-ready handicrafts, fashion, and home décor items using Water Hyacinth as a primary material – pairing material innovation with structured business, design, and market support.

Participating Enterprises include: Ima Water Hyacinth Products – Beliatta, Hambantota (A niche-scale craft enterprise by T.P. Imalka Rasadi); the Centre for Alternative Technologies (CAT) – Nallur, Jaffna (A locally rooted organisation by Rakulan Kandasamy); J.J. Products – Ehetuwewa, Kurunegala (A seasoned Water Hyacinth craft enterprise by Waduge Niluka Jayanthi); Kumari Athkam – Galgamuwa, Kurunegala (A well-established Water Hyacinth-based craft enterprise by I. M. Dhammika Priyadarshani Kumari); Sustain U – Bandaragama, Kalutara (A homegrown venture by Kasuni Chamudika,; and Pradeepa Eco-Products – Bingiriya, Kurunegala (An emerging enterprise by Manik Dhewage Pradeepa Madupani). Participants were onboarded via a kick-off workshop facilitated by Programme Lead Lonali Rodrigo, introducing supply chain and marketing fundamentals.

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.