Video: SpaceX rocket explodes in the Indian Ocean after splashdown

MSN - The most powerful SpaceX starship ever launched has exploded in the Indian Ocean after a mostly successful test flight.

The voyage was not without a few glitches, but SpaceX employees shown on a livestream roared in delight following the trial flight that comes as the firm owned by Elon Musk prepares a potentially record initial public offering.

The spacecraft is an upgraded version of the Starship that Nasa is counting on to land astronauts on the moon.

The Starship blasted off from the southern tip of Texas, carrying 20 mock Starlink satellites that were released midway through the hour-long spaceflight that stretched halfway around the world.

It experienced some engine trouble before reaching its final destination – the Indian Ocean – and erupted in flames upon impact.

The vehicle had coasted through space but was not in exactly the correct orbit after one of its engines malfunctioned during an initial burn.

“I wouldn’t call it nominal orbital insertion,” company spokesperson Dan Huot said, adding, however, that it was “within bounds” of a previously analyzed trajectory.

After the Super Heavy booster separated from the upper stage as expected, Huot said on the livestream that the booster failed to complete its so-called boost-back burn.

The booster fell swiftly back to Earth, uncontrolled, into the Gulf of Mexico. SpaceX wasn’t planning to retrieve the booster anyway, but was still hoping for a precision return.

Musk called it “an epic” launch and landing. “You scored a goal for humanity,” he told his team via X.

It is the 12th test flight of the rocket that Musk is building to transport people to Mars, but first comes the moon, and Nasa’s Artemis programme.

Nasa administrator Jared Isaacman flew in for the launch, saying Starship is now one step closer to the Moon.

The last of the old space-skimming Starships lifted off in October. SpaceX’s third-generation Starship – a souped-up version dubbed V3 – soared from a brand-new launch pad at Starbase, near the Mexican border in Texas. Last-minute launchpad issues had thwarted Thursday evening’s attempt.

SpaceX was hoping to avoid the fireworks it experienced during back-to-back launches last year when mid-air explosions rained wreckage down on the Atlantic. Earlier flights also ended in flames.

There was no fireball this time until the very end. The spacecraft plummeted upright into the Indian Ocean under seemingly full control, before toppling over and igniting.

While the lift-off itself went well, not all the engines fired as the booster attempted a controlled return.

The spacecraft also had to make do with fewer engines, but kept heading eastwards 120 miles up. A pair of modified, camera-equipped Starlinks ejected from Starship provided brief views of the spacecraft in flight – a remarkable first.

At 407ft, the latest model eclipses the older Starship lines by several feet and packs more engine thrust.

The revamped booster sports fewer but bigger and stronger grid fins for steering it back to Earth following lift-off, and a larger and more robust fuel transfer line to feed the 33 main engines.

This fuel line is the size of SpaceX’s Falcon 9 first-stage booster. The retro-looking, stainless steel spacecraft also has more of everything – more cameras and more navigation and computer power – as well as docking cones for future rendezvous and moon missions.

Starship is meant to be fully reusable, with giant mechanical arms at the launch pads to catch the returning rocket stages.

But on this latest trial run, nothing was being recovered. The Gulf of Mexico marked the end of the road for the redesigned first-stage booster, and the Indian Ocean for the spacecraft and its satellite demos.

Nasa is paying SpaceX billions of dollars – and also Jeff Bezos’ Blue Origin – to provide the lunar landers that will be used to land Artemis astronauts on the moon.

While Starship has reached the fringes of space on multiple flights lasting an hour at most, Bezos’ Blue Moon has yet to lift off, although a prototype is being readied for a moonshot later this year.

Nasa is following April’s successful lunar fly-by with a docking trial run in orbit around Earth planned for next year. For that Artemis III mission, astronauts will practise docking their Orion capsule with Starship, Blue Moon or both.

A moon landing by two astronauts – Artemis IV – could follow as soon as 2028 using either Starship or Blue Moon, whichever lander is safer and ready first.

It will be Nasa’s first lunar landing with a crew since 1972’s Apollo 17. The goal this time is a moon base near the lunar South Pole, staffed by astronauts as well as robots.

SpaceX is already taking reservations for private flights to the moon and Mars on Starship.

The world’s first space tourist, California businessman Dennis Tito, and his wife signed up three and a half years ago for a flight around the moon. The timing is uncertain.

This week, another wealthy space tourist – Chinese-born bitcoin investor Chun Wang – announced he will fly to Mars on Starship’s first interplanetary mission.

Wang previously chartered a SpaceX polar flight in a Dragon capsule last year and, along with his hand-picked crew, became the first to orbit above the North and South poles.