Intex Sri Lanka 2024: Redefining international sourcing for Sri Lanka’s garment industry

The 15th edition of the premier international textile sourcing platform in South Asia commenced in Colombo yesterday, 7 August, and will run until 9 August at the BMICH, Colombo.

Over the last 10 years, Intex Sri Lanka has been at the forefront of Sri Lanka’s textile and apparel sector, playing a pivotal role in facilitating trade and innovation, and driving business opportunities to support the country’s garment exports.

Present for the Grand Opening Ceremony were Chief Guest High Commission of India Colombo Deputy High Commissioner Dr. Satyanjal Pandey, Guest of Honour Export Development Board (EDB) of Sri Lanka Chairman and Chief Executive Officer Dr. Bernard Kingsley, and Joint Apparel Association Forum of Sri Lanka (JAAFSL) Secretary General Yohan Lawrence.

Dedicated country pavilions from China, India, Taiwan, Pakistan, Korea, and Japan with exhibitors from 12+ countries including Korea, Taiwan, Japan, Sri Lanka, India, Pakistan, China, Thailand, Netherlands, Germany, Luxembourg, and the USA will present the latest natural and MMF fibres and yarns, textiles and fabrics, trims and accessories, dyes and chemicals, and software solutions across four halls at the BMICH.

International buyer delegations from Russia, Mexico, India, and buyers from 20+ countries including Bangladesh, China, India, Indonesia, Japan, Maldives, Mexico, Myanmar, Pakistan, Qatar, Russia, Seychelles, Singapore, Taiwan, Thailand, UAE, UK, USA, and Vietnam will visit Intex Sri Lanka.

Buying teams from MAS Holdings, Brandix, Hirdaramani, Maliban, and many more will visit Intex Sri Lanka to discover the next big thing.

“2024 presents a unique opportunity to reshape the global textile and apparel industry,” said Worldex India Executive Director and Intex Sri Lanka Organiser Arti Bhagat. “Intex Sri Lanka is at the forefront of driving this transformation by connecting the Sri Lankan manufacturing powerhouse with global and regional stakeholders to create a more resilient, secure supply chain that prioritises efficiency and long-term industry sustainability. We are setting new industry standards and solidifying our position as Sri Lanka’s premier B2B platform. We look forward to welcoming industry leaders, key decision-makers, and stakeholders from the industry and the region to join us at Intex Sri Lanka as we collectively shape the future of the textile and apparel sector.”

The Textile Association India (TAI) is also partnering with Intex Sri Lanka and organised the TAI Overseas Conference at the BMICH, where industry leaders from India will network with Sri Lankan businesses at the day-long conference.

The Interactive Business Forum (IBF) Seminar Series will share actionable strategies to future-proof and grow your business internationally by industry experts.

Intex Sri Lanka also presents ‘Trendz Now – The Innovation and Fashion Zone’ by the University of Moratuwa, presenting the future of fashion, latest trends, innovations, upcoming designs, and movements in the fashion world.

This year also sees the debut of InMac, the international garment machinery and technology show co-located with Intex Sri Lanka. InMac showcases the latest machinery and technology including printing, packaging, and automated systems, providing much needed solutions to drive efficiencies empowering Sri Lankan manufacturers and exporters to be globally competitive.

Endorsed by the EDB and the JAAFSL and its member bodies, Intex Sri Lanka is your launch pad to exponential growth.