Comment: Arundhati Roy’s Mother Mary Comes to Me

My title reads ‘Comment …’ I dare not claim this article to be a review of Arundhati’s latest book, since she is too unique a writer for me to attempt criticizing.

I start by saying that her latest book is for the general reader, and not a political or protest publication, is a biography of her mother and autobiography of herself. After a long time I got to read a book that I could not put down – it was so stylishly constructed, written in an easy flowing manner and absorbingly interesting: the two lives – her mother’s after her marriage to a tea planter in Assam and hers from childhood.

The Penguin edition I bought from Vijitha Yapa bookshop soon after its advertised publication date 6 September, was stunning in appearance: brilliant red with the title and author’s name in dull gold letters with a moth of the same colour below. Menacing, I imagine. The author refers to the creature often: “A cold, furry moth on a frightened heart. That moth was my constant companion.” On the back cover is this statement: “In these pages my mother, my gangster, shall live. She was my shelter and my storm.” A half sized, detachable white cover has a picture of the young author with cigarette and at the back an older, salt and pepper haired woman; both arrestingly beautiful.

Having read a couple of reviews in foreign newspapers and an extract from the book, I was under the impression that the entire book was about Mary Roy, Arundhati’s mother. Incorrect. At page 108 of 372, (after 15 short chapters; one third the book) her tumultuous life with her mother ended, (temporarily, I hasten to add) by Arundhati, now a qualified architect and 21, escaping to live in Delhi and breaking ties with her mother. “My unceasing sense of apprehension and the instinct to survive from day to day, moment to moment, were still intact. Perhaps my old friend, the cold furry moth on my heart, saved me from drifting into a life of addiction to drugs or alcohol or crime, which would be the most natural thing to happen to someone like me…. It had been three years since I met or communicated with Mrs Roy. I thought of her often, but mostly with relief that I had escaped. I worried about her, but I knew that I did not yet have what it took to withstand her, to survive.”

Arundhati’s brother, Lalith Kumar Christopher Roy (LKC), a year older than her, remembered better times spent in Assam with the father present. He was equally smothered with maternal derision, scorn, resentment and even physical blows but he suffered silently. He was separated from mother and sister when he went to college in Delhi and then like his uncle, G Isaac, graduated from Balliol College, Oxford University (not precisely documented) and ended up a very successful seafood exporter. He married a teacher at Mrs Roy’s Pallikoodam School, Kottayam, Kerala. On Mrs Roy’s death, LKC’s wife became principal of the now well-known school of holistic education including Bharatanatyam and swimming. The siblings united with their father – Ramjit Roy when he moved to Delhi. She named him Nothing Man and loved him.

Arundhati then moves her biography to the story of herself; her romantic loves, her various interests and undertakings, her marriage and her writing of The God of Small Things (1997) and two decades later her second novel – The Ministry of Utmost Happiness (2017). All is enthrallingly interesting, but me, I stodgily waded through her protests and the inherent police and judicial danger and threats. She was in police remand for one night: contempt of Court. In these periods of time she wrote extensively on the cause she, with others, was espousing, like protesting the building of the Sarda Sarova Dam across the Narmada River in Gujerat, the merciless killing of thousands of Muslims by rioting Hindus in the same state in 2002, and the Kashmir issue. But the novelist in her could not be restrained forever.

“Nothing made me forget the world like reading did. Nothing made me think about the word like reading did. Nothing else filled me up. Nothing else emptied me out…Kipling, Shakespeare, the opening passage of Lolita, G Isaac’s sentences purloined from Joyce’s Ulysses, streaked like comets across my reading sky.”

“Once I started running, once I joined Architecture School, I thought that a writer was the last thing I could ever do. I gave up. And then years later came that letter. Have you ever considered becoming a writer?  I knew that I hadn’t found the grazing language-animal. But the bloodhound in me caught the faint, faraway scent of it on the breeze.”

The writer of the letter was JC – Gerard de Cunha – a senior student she moved from the student residence of Architecture School, to live with. To legalise their living together to others-1978 to 1882 – they staged a mock marriage They were entwined with each other as she writes, but separated when he wanted to settle down in Goa and she wanted to return to Delhi.

She got employment in the National Institute of Urban Affairs in New Delhi with a woman as her boss. One day, her boss wanted some documents delivered to her flat. Arundhati took them to find the boss lived above a flat which was raucous with conversation and laughter by some older persons. The boss’ husband opened the door with two small girls clinging to him. She was immediately attracted to him – Pradip Krishen, documentary film maker – and he to her. His erstwhile wife left him shortly afterwards and Arundhati moved to live with him, a foster mother to his two daughters, aged less than ten years, and approved of daughter-in-law to his parents who lived below him and hosted frequent parties. Pradip and she married in 1984 and are a couple though they now live separately. She wrote screen scripts for him, including the BBC, and was paid well and won awards too which kept them in money.

Arundhati, though she initially escaped to Architecture School when 18 and graduated three years later, relented and visited her mother, kept in touch with her and spent her vacations in Kottayam. Mrs Roy continued being wickedly acerbic, sharply sarcastic and disapproving but within her was pride in her daughter as she became an internationally known person. She even told her daughter she had tried to abort the growing fetus in her with eating raw papaw and using a coat hanger.

She arranged a vast event in her school to launch The God…to the Keralan public. She did not want her brother present, but G Isaac did attend, much to his niece and nephew’s delight.

Around the time The Ministry… was published in 2017, Mrs Roy’s health declined and she gradually became house and then room bound. She had plenty helpers and even Kurussammal, first met in their Ooty days of poverty. Arundhati visited her mother often, helped to care for her. Almost at the same time G Isaac and sister Mary Roy were on ventilators. He died, she survived. Arundhati writes when she was stuck in Delhi during the Covid pandemic: “I wanted to hug her and reassure her that everything would be OK. But you can’t hug a porcupine. Not even over the telephone.”

Mary Roy died peacefully at age 89. Arundhati had returned to Delhi. The funeral was almost a state funeral with the police band playing. She was hailed as a great woman: gaining Keralan Christian women’s right to their share of family property and a great educator. Her headstone read:

Arundhati mourned her death, the brother took it in his stride. They built a grove in memory of her. Her mother sent her a letter that she loved her and was proud of her; Arundhati showed love and devotion once she returned to her mother.

is a wonderful biography cum autobiography of two remarkable women: double treat. Maybe there is a Christian element in the title and story – mercy. Arundhati’s language and style of writing are unique – short sentences; brilliant comparisons, explicit truths, outrageous once in a while with a stream of humour running through. Well worth its price of Rs 6,300/- It is a must read, more so for women.

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.