Systemic shock could expose private credit’s broad reach, growing risk: Fitch Ratings

Fitch Ratings – New York: A shock to the financial system that impacts the private credit sector could reveal the extent that it has moved from a niche product for sophisticated investors to an increasingly relevant component of the global capital markets, Fitch Ratings says.

Private credit’s pervasiveness could amplify a systemic shock and impact a wide range of investors and lenders, including pension and sovereign wealth funds, banks, insurance companies, foundations/endowments, high net-worth individuals and, increasingly, retail investors.

This could result in far-reaching consequences for capital formation, credit availability, consumer confidence/spending, social safety nets, national development, depositor stability and insurance availability.

Fitch does not currently view the risks associated with private credit as systemic, despite the sector exhibiting various “bubble-like” attributes, including rapid growth and financial innovation, spread compression, heightened competition, growing retail participation and rising borrower leverage.

This is because private credit is still a relatively small portion of the overall financial system and is typically facilitated through funds with committed capital, limited redemption risk and moderate fund-level leverage.

That said, in the event of a broader economic stress, private credit could be a meaningful transmission channel given its growth and increasing interconnectedness across various parts of the financial system. The private credit industry is growing in size and complexity.

As of YE2024, it was comparable in scale to the U.S. leveraged loan and high-yield bond markets, each at $1.6 trillion, and is expected to reach $2.7 trillion by 2029, according to Preqin.

In the event of a systemic shock (a sharp widening in risk indicators, such as interbank spreads, an interest rate shock or rising margin calls), the private credit sector could be exposed to losses and/or elevated redemptions.

Given the possible transmission effects and downside risks, the private sector warrants continued close monitoring and would benefit from increased oversight and transparency.