Softlogic Life delivers Rs.7.2bn GWP

Rs.7.2bn in health and protection claims – Sri Lanka’s largest health and protection claim payer

Protects 1.8mn+ Sri Lankans through 870,000+ active policies – Sri Lanka’s largest customer base

Softlogic Life reported its strongest first-half performance to date for the six months ended June 30, 2026 (1HFY26).

Recording the highest increase in premiums amongst the Sri Lankan life insurers, the company’s gross written premium (GWP) grew by Rs.7.2 billion year-on-year (YoY), lifting its market share to 20.3 percent as at 2Q 2026, up from 18.4 percent for FY2025.

The GWP performance for the period reached Rs.26 billion, a 39 percent YoY increase from Rs.18.7 billion in 1H2025. Profit after tax stood at Rs.1.46 billion, growing 20 percent over the first half of 2025, while profit before tax increased by 14 percent to Rs.1.98 billion.

The company maintained an impressive return on equity of 39 percent and a capital adequacy ratio of 245 percent as at December 31, 2025, more than double the regulatory requirement of 120 percent, underscoring its financial resilience and long-term stability.

Softlogic Life’s financial position remained robust during the period, with total assets increasing to Rs.81.6 billion as at June 30, 2026, while total equity reached Rs.14.6 billion.

Financial investments amounted to Rs.61 billion, accounting for 75 percent of total assets, reflecting the company’s prudent investment strategy and the investment in government securities were 74 percent of the portfolio.

Reaffirming its position as Sri Lanka’s largest health and protection claims payer, Softlogic Life paid Rs.10.4 billion in claims and benefits during the first half of the year, up from Rs.9.1 billion in the corresponding period last year. Of this, over Rs.7.2 billion, which is more than half of all claims paid, went toward the health and protection claims alone, underscoring the growing role Softlogic Life plays in safeguarding the health and financial well-being of Sri Lankan families. This reflects the company’s core purpose: delivering greater quality of life to Sri Lankans, with meaningful financial protection and long-term peace of mind when it matters most. Today, Softlogic Life protects more than 1.8 million Sri Lankans through over 870,000 active policies, up from 770,749 policies in 1H2025 making it the country’s largest life insurance provider by customer reach.

The company’s sustained growth continues to be driven by a balanced portfolio of protection and long-term savings solutions, supported by an expanding distribution network and ongoing investment in customer experience and operational excellence.

This first-half performance builds on a period of transformative growth for Softlogic Life, including the completion of its acquisition of Allianz Life Insurance Lanka in July 2025 - the first life-insurer-to-life-insurer acquisition in the history of Sri Lanka’s insurance industry and more recently, its acquisition of a 60 percent controlling stake in Bangladesh’s Diamond Life Insurance in July 2026, marking the first overseas acquisition by a Sri Lankan life insurance company, whilst being the first acquisition by a foreign insurer in Bangladesh.

The Bangladesh acquisition marks the next phase of Softlogic Life’s growth strategy, as the company looks to replicate its proven Sri Lankan success disciplined execution, product innovation and sustained customer trust in a new regional market.

“Delivering the industry’s largest absolute GWP growth, while remaining the country’s largest payer of health and protection claims, reflects the strength of our strategy and consistency of execution. We remain focused on sustainable growth, strong financial fundamentals and creating lasting value for our policyholders, shareholders and stakeholders. As the industry evolves, we will continue to strengthen our leadership through innovation, discipline and above all, customer trust,” said Softlogic Life Chairman Ashok Pathirage.

The first-half performance comes at a time when Sri Lanka’s insurance landscape is undergoing structural change. An ageing population, rising healthcare costs and increasing awareness of long-term financial security are driving greater demand for comprehensive protection solutions.

Against this backdrop, Softlogic Life continues to invest in strengthening its capabilities, recognising that the future of insurance extends beyond financial protection to supporting healthier, more financially resilient communities. Among these investments is the company’s recent product innovation, Health for Life, a health insurance solution without an expiration date or age.

“Our first-half results reflect a business built on trust, disciplined execution and innovation. Health for Life is the present that is redefining protection for Sri Lankans, while our expansion into Bangladesh marks an exciting new future. We remain focused on deepening customer trust, expanding access to quality protection in Sri Lanka and taking our innovations and best practices to the region,” said Softlogic Life Managing Director Iftikar Ahamed.