US and EU reach 15-pct ‘all inclusive’ Trump tariff deal as Sri Lanka continues talks

ECONOMYNEXT – The European Union and the United States have reached a 15 percent tariff deal President Donald Trump said would be ‘all inclusive’ according to EU Commission President Ursula von der Leyen.

Trump said the US was talking to a number of other countries and he was “doing them at the low end, not the high end because we don’t want to hurt anybody.”

More discussions are also on with China he indicated describing the existing agreement as a ‘sort of’ deal.

Sri Lanka President Anura Kumara Dissanayake had discussions with the US Trade Representative Jamieson Greer Friday as discussions to lower tariffs continue.

RELATED : Sri Lanka President in virtual tariff talks with US Trade Rep

“We are agreeing that the tariff straight across for automobiles and everything else will   be a straight across tariff of 15 percent,” Trump said at a joint briefing with von der Leyen on the EU deal.

“We have the opening up of all of the European countries which I think I could say were essentially closed.

“I mean they weren’t exactly taking our autos. You weren’t exactly taking our agriculture and then you would have smaller things but for the most part it was closed and now it’s open.

The EU agreed to buy 750 billion worth of U.S. energy and invest an additional 600 billion dollars of investments into the U.S. above current levels, Trump said.

EU investments in the US are a key driver of America’s trade deficit and more investments will widen it. The EU will also buy an unspecified volume of American defence equipment.

Trump’s and his key advisor Harvard qualified Peter Navarro’s understanding of the trade deficit rejects economics and is based on spurious Mercantilism, critics say.

“We have a trade deal between the two largest economies in the world,” Leyen said. “And it’s a big deal. It’s a huge deal. It will bring stability. It will bring predictability. That’s very important for our businesses on both sides of the Atlantic.

“We just struck a deal  with Japan as you know and we’re very  close to a deal with China,” Trump said.

“We really sort of made a deal with China, but we’ll see how that goes.”

“And we have numerous other deals. And mostly I’m just going to charge tariffs and you know there’s not a deal per se, but people are going to pay tariffs and we’re doing them at the low end, not the high end because we don’t want to hurt anybody.”