Fitch confirms ‘A-(lka)’ domestic rating of National Development Bank Plc

ECONOMYNEXT – Fitch Ratings said it was confirming an A-(lka) rating on Sri Lanka’s National Development Bank Plc with a Stable outlook, amid an improvement in operating environment, indicated by headline macroeconomic indicators.

Fitch said it expects Sri Lanka’s stabilising macroeconomic environment to support NDB’s ability to generate and defend business volumes, but its business profile remains constrained by risks in the domestic operating environment which are still elevated.

“We expect NDB to benefit from the resumption in lending, albeit modest, thereby leading to an uptick in the share of net loans in total assets (end-1Q24: 57.5%), similar to peers.”

NDB’s risk profil remains tied to the credit and market risk of the sovereign, through its substantial exposure via the defaulted foreign-currency-denominated sovereign bonds (end-2023: 6.5% of assets) and a further 25.6% of assets in rupee-denominated treasury securities, the rating agency said.

Fitch Ratings – Colombo – 22 Jul 2024: Fitch Ratings has affirmed Sri Lanka-based National Development Bank PLC (NDB) National Long-Term Rating at ‘A-(lka)’. The Outlook is Stable. At the same time, Fitch has affirmed NDB’s Sri Lankan rupeedenominated proposed and outstanding subordinated debt at ‘BBB(EXP)(lka)’ and ‘BBB(lka)’, respectively.

Intrinsic Profile Drives Rating: NDB’s National Long-Term Rating reflects its own financial strength, which is highly influenced by its exposure to the sovereign’s weak credit profile (Long-Term Foreign-Currency Issuer Default Rating (IDR): RD; LongTerm Local-Currency IDR: CCC-) and the ongoing sovereign debt restructuring, which had been putting pressure on NDB’s credit profile. The rating also reflects NDB’s modest domestic franchise as Sri Lanka’s sixth-largest commercial bank.

Stabilising OE: Sri Lankan banks’ operating environment (OE) continues to show signs of stabilisation, as evident in sustained improvements in reported headline macroeconomic indicators, supporting the recovery in banks’ operational flexibility.

Further improvement to the banks’ OE remains contingent on successful execution of the sovereign’s external debt-restructuring exercise alongside the restoration of the sovereign’s creditworthiness, given the strong link between sovereign financial health and banks’ operating conditions.

Economic Recovery Spurs Lending: Fitch expects Sri Lanka’s stabilising macroeconomic environment to support NDB’s ability to generate and defend business volumes, but its business profile remains constrained by risks in the domestic OE which are still elevated. We expect NDB to benefit from the resumption in lending, albeit modest, thereby leading to an uptick in the share of net loans in total assets (end-1Q24: 57.5%), similar to peers.

Exposure to Sovereign Risks: NDB’s risk profile, similar to peers, remains tied to the credit and market risk of the sovereign, through its substantial exposure via the defaulted foreign-currency-denominated sovereign bonds (end-2023: 6.5% of assets) and a further 25.6% of assets in rupee-denominated treasury securities. These exposures make the bank vulnerable to the sovereign’s repayment capacity and liquidity position. NDB has the

third-highest exposure to sovereign bonds, as a share of total assets, among local banks.

Asset Quality in Focus: NDB’s impaired (stage 3) loans ratio of nearly 17% at end-1Q24 (2023: 16.6%) is one of the highest among the large Fitch-rated Sri Lankan banks. Fitch expects this ratio to decrease in the near- to medium-term alongside focused recoveries, buttressed by the improvement in borrower repayment capacity and Fitch’s anticipated expansion in the bank’s loan book. Asset quality is burdened further by its large exposure

Risks to Profitability Abate: We believe downside risks to NDB’s profitability have largely eased, even in the event of incremental credit costs from the restructuring of sovereign bonds if this results in the need for moderately higher provisions than already assumed. NDB’s core profitability metric – operating profit/risk-weighted assets – dipped to 1.8% in 1Q24 (2023: 2.3%). However, we expect this to improve in the medium term on account of a lower credit-cost burden relative to prior years which could outweigh the pressure on net interest margins.

Sovereign Risk Pressures Capital: The bank’s regulatory common equity Tier 1 (CET1) capital ratio improved to 12.5% by end-1Q24 but remains one of the lowest among the large Fitch-rated Sri Lankan banks. Capital buffers remain under pressure, particularly from sovereign risks, given the bank’s exposure to defaulted sovereign bonds and the rupee-denominated government securities, in addition to capital-impairment risks on its loan book.

Funding and Liquidity Risks Ease: The foreign- and local-currency funding and liquidity stresses are less severe relative to the height of the crisis period, due to more favourable external sector flows and the bank’s focus on liquidity preservation. We believe these developments have reduced the risk of bank failure. However, NDB’s funding and liquidity profile – particularly in foreign currency – remains susceptible to sudden changes in creditor sentiment driven by adverse changes to the sovereign’s credit profile, similar to peers.

Factors that Could, Individually or Collectively, Lead to Negative Rating Action/Downgrade

The bank’s National Rating is sensitive to a change in its creditworthiness relative to other Sri Lankan issuers.

A deterioration in NDB’s key credit metrics beyond our base-case expectations relative to peers would also lead to increased pressure on the rating, which is driven by its intrinsic financial strength.

Factors that Could, Individually or Collectively, Lead to Positive Rating Action/Upgrade

Positive rating action on the sovereign may lead to an upgrade in the rating. A sustained improvement in its key credit metrics beyond our base-case expectations relative to peers, could also lead to an upgrade.

OTHER DEBT AND ISSUER RATINGS: KEY RATING DRIVERS SUBORDINATED DEBT

NDB’s Sri Lankan rupee-denominated outstanding and proposed subordinated debt is rated two notches below the National Long-Term Rating anchor. This reflects Fitch’s baseline notching for loss severity for this type of debt, and our expectations of poor recoveries. There is no additional notching for non-performance risks, as the notes do not incorporate going-concern loss-absorption features.

The subordinated debt ratings will move in tandem with the bank’s National Long-Term Rating.

REFERENCES FOR SUBSTANTIALLY MATERIAL SOURCE CITED AS KEY DRIVER OF RATING

The principal sources of information used in the analysis are described in the Applicable Criteria.