Trump sees the world as a football?

US President Donald Trump seems to think the world must do as he says and he is free to do anything. He now wants FIFA President Gianni Infantino, 56, to be the next UN Secretary General, according to internal media reports. Trump could not have found a better candidate for the job to further his own interests. None of the UN Secretaries-General have had the courage to stand up to the US, or to any other world power for that matter, but Infantino would be the most pro-American UN chief, if ever elected to the top post. Trump and Infantino have not commented on the media reports at issue. It is possible that the White House has leaked Trump’s plan to test the waters.

The New York Post has quoted an unnamed top Trump aide as saying that Trump wants the FIFA President as the next UN Chief because he firmly believes that Infantino is respected by everyone around the world, and recognises that he (Infantino) has a special ability to bring people together. But the truth is apparently otherwise. All leaders are fond of sycophants. Infantino is putty in Trump’s hands. Does the international community have a high opinion of the current FIFA chief?

The world must have lost whatever respect it may have had for Infantino when FIFA unashamedly gave in to Trump, who personally called Infantino and requested a review of a red card issued to US striker Folarin Balogun; FIFA subsequently suspended the player’s one-game ban and allowed him to play against Belgium, much to the resentment of the entire Europe. There have been calls for Infantino’s ouster for doing so. Most of all, FIFA incurred much international opprobrium by awarding its inaugural peace prize to Trump despite his military aggression.

How Infantino has ruined his reputation and that of FIFA by grovelling before Trump became evident on the day of the FIFA World Cup final match between Spain and Argentina last Sunday. There were scattered boos from the crowd when Trump was shown briefly on the jumbotron. But the stadium erupted in boos when he and his candidate for the post of UN chief entered the field for the presentation ceremony. That is the stigma of association Infantino has to bear for getting close to Trump.

The claim, attributed to Trump that the incumbent FIFA chief is capable of bringing nations together through football, and therefore he can lead the UN may be based on the belief that sports unite humanity. But it should be viewed against the central argument of George Orwell’s brilliant essay, The Sporting Spirit, which shatters the myth that international sports foster global goodwill. Orwell wrote it following the Dynamo Moscow football team’s tour of Britain in 1945. The matches were marred by disputed refereeing decisions, accusations of unfair play, violent incidents and intense nationalistic passions. Orwell’s arguments are still valid, the most famous one being that modern sports are essentially “war minus the shooting” driven by intense nationalism, a desire to humiliate the opponent, and a lust for victory rather than fair play. This was borne out by the Argentinian players’ deplorable behaviour during and after the recent FIFA World Cup final. Above all, the Iranian football team faced severe logistical hurdles, visa restrictions, and mandatory same-day travel policies at the hands of the US, prompting the head coach of Iran Amir Ghalenoei to say that his squad was the most oppressed due to those restrictions. FIFA lacked the courage to stand up for the Iranian team. How FIFA chief Infantino would behave if Trump succeeded in making him the UN Secretary General is not difficult to imagine.

The possibility of Trump going ahead with his plan to make Infantino the next UN Chief and even using US tariffs to pressure other countries into supporting his candidate cannot be ruled out. It is believed that none of the other prospective candidates has the backing of the permanent members of the Security Council, and this situation is expected to help Trump have the FIFA chief elevated to the top post. However, running the UN is a whole different ballgame. Perhaps, the only striking similarity between FIFA and the UN is that the latter’s mandate receives the same treatment as a football from the Permanent Five and their close allies.

There is one main dissimilarity between FIFA and the UN. FIFA, by and large, enforces the Laws of the Game, but the veto-wielding powers of the UN are guided by Rafferty’s rules, as can be seen from the way they are attacking other countries and committing blatant human rights violations with impunity. The US even abducts and assassinates the leaders of other nations openly.

The Trump administration called the UNHRC (United Nations Human Rights Council) a ‘cesspool’ before withdrawing from it in 2018. Going by the US contention, the UN can be considered a bigger version of what the Trump government called the UNHRC, in 2018, and therefore Infantino should not consider it an honour to be considered by Trump for the post of UN Secretary-General.

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.