Sri Lanka’s Premadasa second least unpopular in June, according to poll

ECONOMYNEXT — Sri Lanka opposition leader Sajith Premadasa’s net favourability rating increased by 27 points to -39 while President Ranil Wickremesinghe’s also increased by 10 points to -66 in June compared to the previous month, though rival presidential hopeful Anura Kumara Dissanayake remained the least unpopular at -20 despite an 18-point drop, according to an independent poll.

The Institute for Health Policy (IHP)’s Sri Lanka Opinion Tracker Survey (SLOTS) showed that, in June 2024, Premadasa was the second least unpopular.

IHP explained in a statement that favourability estimates for each month are based on 100–500 interviews conducted during that month and during a few weeks before and afterward to ensure a minimum set of responses. The June 2024 estimates are based on 302 (Premadasa), 290 (Dissanayake), 299 (Wickremasinghe), and 123 (Gotabaya Rajapaksa) interviews.

“Negative scores, i.e., a net favourability rating of less than zero, means that the individual or institution is UNPOPULAR. Only positive scores, i.e., net favourability is more than zero, mean that the individual or institution is POPULAR on average,” the institute said.

IHP says it is an independent, non-partisan research centre based in Colombo.

“SLOTS surveys a national sample of adults (ages 18 and over) reached by random digit dialling of mobile numbers, and others coming from a national panel of respondents who were previously recruited through random selection. SLOTS tracks favourability by asking respondents if they have a favourable or unfavourable opinion of a public figure or institution: net favourability being the average of the positive (+100) and negative (-100) responses. All

estimates are weighted to match the national population with respect to age, sex, ethnicity, socioeconomic status, sector, province and past voting preference. Monthly estimates are based on samples of 100+ interviews pooled from interviews in each month and from weeks before and afterwards. As the March update uses a more recent data set than the previous update, there are small changes in estimates of favourability ratings for previous months.

“The SLOTS survey has previously been funded by the Neelan Tiruchelvam Trust, the UK National Institute for Health and Care Research (NIHR), The Asia Foundation in Sri Lanka, and others. Current field work is financed by the IHP Public Interest Research Fund and others. The sponsors play no role in the study design, analysis, or interpretation of findings.” (Colombo/Jul19/2024)