Biden drops out of Presidential race, endorses Harris

ECONOMYNEXT – US President Joe Biden has ended his re-election campaign and also endorsed Vice-President Kamala Harris for the nomination after rising calls by fellow democrats to drop out.

“My fellow Democrats, I have decided not to accept the nomination and to focus all my energies on my duties as President for the remainder of my term,” Biden said in a post on X.com (twitter).

“My very first decision as the party nominee in 2020 was to pick Kamala Harris as my Vice President. And it’s been the best decision I’ve made.

“Today I want to offer my full support and endorsement for Kamala to be the nominee of our party this year.”

President Biden has come under increasing pressure to drop out over concerns over cognitive impairments following a public debate with Donald Trump and subsequent public appearances.

Donald Trump concluded what was widely agreed to be a successful convention.

Some democrats are calling for an ‘open process’ to select a new candidate.

Among alternatives to Vice-President Harris is California Governor Gavin Newsom, Illinois Governor J B Pritzker, Michigan Governor Gretchen Whitmer, Colorado Governor, Jared Polis, and Pennsylvania Governor Josh Shapiro.

Newsom has initially tweeted in support of Harris saying no one is better to challenge Donald Trump’s “dark vision” guide the US in a healthier direction.

With our democracy at stake and our future on the line, no one is better to prosecute the case against Donald Trump's dark vision and guide our country in a healthier direction than America’s Vice President, @KamalaHarris.

Nancy Pelosi, a democratic legislator considered a key player in the party has so far not endorsed anyone.

“President Joe Biden is a patriotic American who has always put our country first. His legacy of vision, values and leadership make him one of the most consequential Presidents in American history,” she said after Biden exited the race.

“With love and gratitude to President Biden for always believing in the promise of America and giving people the opportunity to reach their fulfillment.”