President appoints Committee of Inquiry on 2019 Easter Sunday attacks; wants report in three months

President Ranil Wickremesinghe has appointed a Committee of Inquiry to investigate the actions taken by the State Intelligence Service (SIS), Chief of National Intelligence (CNI), and other relevant authorities concerning prior intelligence received about the bomb attacks on 21 April 2019.

This decision follows the findings of the final report of the Commission of Inquiry, dated 31 January 2021, which highlighted that Indian Intelligence agencies and other sources had provided advance warnings about the impending attacks.

The Committee of Inquiry will be chaired by A.N.J. De Alwis, Retired Judge of the High Court. Other esteemed members of the committee include SLAS special grade Officer K.N.K. Somaratne and Senior Lawyer W.M.A.N. Nishane, AAL.

The committee’s mandate includes examining whether actions or measures were taken by the SIS, CNI, and other relevant authorities based on the prior information or intelligence on an impending attack on 21 April  2019 by Indian intelligence agencies and any other sources and if so, adequacy of the actions and measure taken by the SIS, CNI and other relevant authorities.

Additionally, the committee will investigate the circumstances surrounding the Directorate of Military Intelligence’s (DMI) and Criminal Investigation Department’s (CID) initial belief that the Vavunathivu killing of two police officers on 30 November 2018, was connected to the LTTE. This belief was held for four months before suspects with alleged links to the National Thowheed Jamath (NTJ) were identified.

A compact disk containing the final report of the Commission of Inquiry on the bomb attacks of 21 April 2019, has been provided to the committee. The President has authorised the committee to inquire relevant officials and examine pertinent documents to thoroughly investigate these matters.

Senior Assistant Secretary to the President, Sarathanjali Manoharan will serve as the Secretary to the Committee of Inquiry. The committee is expected to submit its report, including findings and recommendations, to the President by 15 September.