Colombo tea auction strengthens as buyer activity improves

The auction offerings declined to 5.8 million kilogrammes (M/Kgs) from the previous week’s 6.0 M/Kgs on offer.

Improved activity was seen and a firm to dearer trend was there for most teas on offer.

The teas in the Ex-Estate catalogues were sold at the second Out Cry Auction for the year, with the offerings, which were similar to last and totalled 0.88 M/Kgs.

Improved demand was seen for the Better Western BOP/BOPFs, which appreciated by Rs.50 per kilogramme and Rs.100 per kilogramme, respectively.  In the Below Best and Plainer categories too, select improved BOP/BOPFs appreciated by Rs.20-40 per kilogramme, whilst the others were irregular with the Plainer BOPs once again being difficult of sale and attracting bids of Rs.100-150 per kilogramme below the previous week’s levels.  The Nuwara Eliyas continued to be a weak feature, with most BOP/BOPF invoices remaining unsold.  The Uda Pussellawa – Better BOP/BOPFs, declined by Rs.50 per kilogramme and more, whist the poorer sorts sold around last week’s levels. The Uva – Seasonal BOPs, continued to sell well though the prices tended to fluctuate, following the quality. The corresponding BOPFs were difficult of sale and mostly unsold. The Non-Seasonal BOPs – Neat leaf invoices, gained by Rs.50-100 per kilogramme, whilst the others were irregular. The corresponding BOPFs gained by Rs.20-40 per kilogramme. The High and Mid Grown CTC teas – BP1s, had hardly any offerings, whilst the better PF1s appreciated by Rs.20-40 per kilogramme, following an improved product, which is encouraging. The corresponding Low Grown types continued to sell well around the previous week’s levels. Improved activity was seen from the shippers to Japan, China and selectively perhaps, the UK and continent. The South African interest was somewhat subdued, whilst the interest from the shippers to the CIS and Middle East was as usual.  The Low Growns totalled approximately 2.4 M/Kgs, with all categories witnessing fair demand.

In the Leafy and Semi-Leafy catalogues, the Select Best and Best BOPs were firm, whilst the Below Best and teas at the bottom declined.

The OPs were generally firm to dearer with the high-priced OPs maintaining its levels, whilst the balance was easier. The OPAs, in general, declined.  The Select Best and Best PEKs were firm, whilst the Below Best together with the bolder/open varieties were easier.  The teas at the bottom maintained. The well-made PEK1s together with the clean leaf teas at the bottom were firm, whilst the Below Best together with the mixed/open types declined. In the Tippy catalogue, the well-made FBOPs together with the cleaner Below Best were firm to dearer, whilst the balance was irregular, following quality.  The well-made FF1s together with the cleaner Below Best and cleaner teas at the bottom were firm, whilst the balance was irregular, following quality. In the Premium catalogue, the very Tippy teas were firm around last levels, whilst the Best and Below Best varieties were dearer, following quality. The balance was irregular.