’One shot can take them all out’: Trump says Iran leaders are within reach

TIMES OF INDIA - US President Donald Trump said Iran's leaders were all within reach at the funeral for the late Supreme Leader Ayatollah Ali Khamenei, claiming "One shot [and we can take them all out]" but insisting he would not act because Washington still needed someone to negotiate with, as talks between the two sides were paused for a week during the mourning period.Speaking to Axios, Trump said the pause in diplomacy was a mutual decision linked to the week-long funeral ceremonies taking place across Iran. "Neither side will shoot at the other" during that time, he said, adding that both governments had agreed to "take a week off" before resuming negotiations.

Trump also commented on the unprecedented scenes of mourning unfolding in Tehran, saying he had expected a different public reaction following Khamenei's death. Referring to images of grieving crowds, he said he was surprised to see Iranians crying because he believed people hated the late leader, adding, "Maybe it's fake tears."

The US president also issued a stark warning directed at Iran's leadership, saying senior officials attending the funeral were vulnerable but would not be targeted. "They are all there. One shot [and we can take them all out], but we are not going to do that because then we would have nobody to negotiate with," Trump said.

His remarks came as tens of thousands of Iranians gathered on Saturday at Tehran's Imam Khomeini Grand Mosalla to pay their respects to Khamenei, who was killed at the beginning of the US-Israeli war on Iran. The funeral marks the centrepiece of a week of state-organised mourning that Iran has presented as a demonstration of public loyalty to the Islamic Republic.

Mourners, many dressed in black and carrying Iranian flags and portraits of Khamenei and his son and successor, Mojtaba Khamenei, filled the vast prayer complex. Crowds beat their chests, wailed and chanted slogans including "Death to America" as the coffin of the late supreme leader was displayed under glass alongside those of his daughter, son-in-law, daughter-in-law and 14-month-old granddaughter.

Despite portraits of Mojtaba being widely displayed during the ceremonies, there has been no public appearance or image released of Iran's new supreme leader since the attack in which he was reportedly injured.

Among those attending the funeral, emotions were mixed with calls for retaliation. "Everyone here has come to avenge the blood of their supreme leader," 40-year-old mourner Arash Rahimi told Reuters. "As our leader has said, we have a blood feud with the United States. Our relations with the United States will never be good."

The funeral is taking place at a pivotal moment for Iran's leadership. While the country's clerical establishment and military survived the conflict with their governing system intact, officials have portrayed the ceasefire agreed with Washington as a victory that could eventually deliver significant economic benefits.

According to Axios, the temporary suspension of US-Iran talks is expected to last until the funeral ceremonies conclude on July 9, after which negotiations are expected to resume if the ceasefire continues to hold.