Santapaws Xmas bazaar and runway to rescue, usher in festive season

From left: Headlines, PR and Events and RAS Manager Upul Wijenayake, Cinnamon Colombo Hotels Area Vice President and Cinnamon Grand Colombo General Manager Kamal Munasinghe, Headlines PR and Events Chairman and RAS Founding Trustee Anusha David and Brian Kerkoven Academy Choreographer and Founder Brian Kerkoven and Thiran Ranatunga of RAS

It’s the season to be loving and giving especially to the less fortunate, and what better way to do so, than to usher in the festive season, keeping in mind man’s best friend.

Rescue Animals Sri Lanka will do just that with two joyous and fun filled, not forgetting glamour and bling events, that will be held in aid of the Rescue Animals Sri Lanka Trust.

Hospitality Partner Cinnamon Grand, headed by the Cinnamon Colombo Hotels Area Vice President and Cinnamon Grand Colombo General Manager Kamal Munasinghe and ably assisted by Dini Isacs, Social Media Partner Zelus, Print Media Partner Wijeya Publications, Videographer Proimage, Choreographer Brian Kirkoven, and the amazing RAS team, have done wonders in putting together not just one but two events – the ‘Santapaws Xmas bazaar’ and ‘Runway to Fashion’ a fashion show with a purpose featuring all of Sri Lanka’s leading designers.

The Santapaws Xmas bazaar will take place on 1 December at the Atrium Lobby of the Cinnamon Grand, and with over 40 stalls is most certainly the ‘Go to’ place for all your Christmas requirements. Clothing, dreamy nightwear, accessories, jewellery, footwear, homemade wines and pickles, Xmas décor, table and bed linen, saris, arts and crafts, stationery and greeting cards, crochet and knitted products, perfumed candles, health food and gluten free products, Vegan products, bath and beauty, perfumes, and of course pet care. An important feature of the Santapaws Xmas bazaar is that three complimentary stalls have been allocated to the Indira Cancer Trust, Alzheimer’s Foundation and Sisters in Law, a charity that helps abused women and girls, for them to sell goods and raise funds for their own charities. The ‘Jax Dip’ a lucky dip named after the RAS mascot who is a miniature Dachshund, whose spine is broken in three places, will be available at the Cinnamon Grand Lobby by the RAS ticket counter and will be launched with the first donation of a toy by Kamal Munasinghe and other partners. However, any toys and children’s gifts – clothes in good condition, packaged food stuffs, etc, could be handed over to Founder RAS Anusha David or members of the RAS team by calling 0777366737, 0779082341, or 0777585998. All of these will be handed over to the Children’s Ward of the Cancer Hospital and the Jinananda Children’s Orhanage in Wellawatte.

“The Cinnamon Grand Colombo is delighted to be a part of these two laudable initiatives spearheaded by Anusha David of Rescue Animals Sri Lanka. We have had a long association with Anusha and look forward to partnering her on future endeavours too,” said Munasinghe.

There are just 6 stalls remaining of the 44 stalls, so feel free to contact the RAS team if you would like to be a part of the most happening bazaar of the season.