BJP national spokesperson Shehzad Poonawalla quits party

The Print - After days of speculation, Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) national spokesperson Shehzad Poonawalla resigned from the party and its activity membership, saying that he was forced to take the decision due to “certain individuals”.

On 31 July, Poonawalla had removed all reference to the BJP from his X bio, triggering speculation about his resignation from the party. However, at that time there was no official confirmation from the BJP or him.In a letter to BJP national president Nitin Nabin, Poonawalla said he was unconditionally resigning from all responsibilities.

“Please read this letter in continuation with my last letter dated 30th of July 2026, where I offered to resign unconditionally from all positions and primary membership of the BJP due to pressing financial and personal circumstances,” he wrote.

“The events of the last few days, courtesy certain individuals about whom I have told you in great detail, have forced me to reinforce and stand by my earlier decision. Without any sense of hurt and only with the sense of gratefulness, love, affection, and highest regard for Prime Minister Narendra Modi Ji, Party President Nitin Nabin Ji, senior leaders like Home Minister Amit Shah Ji, Defence Minister Rajnath Singh Ji and General Secretary (Organisation) Shri B.L Santosh Ji, I would, with all humility at my command, once again thank the party for the platform and opportunities given to me in the last five years,” he added.

Later, in a post on X, he expressed his gratitude to the party, saying that “in no other country and no other party would a story like mine, of a young, Pasmanda Muslim, non dynast, even be possible”.

Poonawalla is the brother of political analyst Tehseen Poonawalla, and they had a very public split, when the BJP spokesperson openly criticised the Congress leadership’s internal elections, which led to Tehseen distancing himself from him.

Hailing from Pune, he comes from a well-off Aga Khan Muslim family. He started working for the Congress in 2008. Poonawalla studied law and interned with Congress leader Suresh Kalmadi before joining the All India Congress Committee (AICC) as a volunteer. After completing his course in 2008, he interned with the Congress’ media research team in Delhi.

He further said that he found it “extremely touching and I am indeed grateful that the party refused to accept my resignation letter immediately and requested me to reconsider the decision”.

Poonawalla who joined the BJP in 2017 and earlier held responsibilities at Delhi BJP said after long and hard contemplation he has arrived at a final decision “that I would like to press for relieving me from my role as National Spokesperson and active primary membership of the BJP”.

A lawyer by training, Poonawalla grabbed headlines in 2017 when he termed the Congress presidential election process as rigged and claimed it was rigged in favour of Rahul Gandhi to elevate him to the post of party president. He had quit the party following this controversy.

ThePrint had reported that at the time of his quitting, he alleged that Congress leaders treated him very shabbily despite his repeated attempts to get in touch with Rahul’s office before his public outburst.

PM Modi had used his claims to hit out at the Congress and the rival party’s presidential elections.

The decision, according to Poonawalla, was owing to “pressing emergency financial and personal circumstances”. He added that he decided to move into the private sector.

However, he pointed out that wherever possible and in whatever format possible he will continue to support the vision and work of Prime Minister Modi and the BJP.

“Like I said, I am only leaving the Vyavastha, not the Vyakti or Vichar,” he added.