Lee Hedges appoints Archie Warman as Chairman; Afzal Ahamed Marikar and Noel Joseph join Board

Lee Hedges PLC has appointed Archie Warman as Chairman and Afzal Ahamed Marikar and Noel Joseph as Independent, Non-Executive Directors.

The new appointments follows Lanka Realty Investments PLC acquiring 51% stake and Eighth Wonder 20.48% stake from Lee Hedges and Company Ltd., of Vamadhevan family and related parties at Rs. 216 per share in January this year.

Warman is a seasoned real estate and investment professional with over two decades of experience in corporate finance, property investment, development and asset management in both the UK and Sri Lanka.

He is a Co-founding Partner of Steradian Capital Investments Ltd., and an Executive Director of Lanka Realty Investments PLC, with a strong track record in structuring capital market transactions, mergers and acquisitions and large-scale real estate developments.

He has led and executed significant transactions on the Colombo Stock Exchange, including rights issues, private placements and mandatory offers and has been instrumental in the development of landmark projects such as HQ Colombo, Mulberry Residences and the W15 hospitality brand.

Warman is a Member of the Royal Institution of Chartered Surveyors (MRICS) and holds a Master’s degree in Property Valuation and Law from Cass Business School, City University of London.

Marikar is a distinguished Sri Lankan businessman, entrepreneur and diplomat with extensive experience spanning construction, manufacturing, renewable energy, hospitality, dairy farming and real estate.

He has served as the Honorary Consul General for Pakistan since 1988 and has also contributed to national reconciliation efforts as a former member of the Board of the Organisation for National Unity and Reconciliation (ONUR).

He is the Chairman/Managing Director of several enterprises, including Conmix Ltd., a long-established civil engineering and construction company; Colourcon Ltd., an award-winning manufacturer of roofing and building products; Ross Hydro Power Ltd, which operates a renewable energy hydro power plant; Icon Hotels Ltd., which manages the award-winning Radh Hotel in Kandy and Ross Dairies Ltd., a modern dairy farming and milk production business.

Marikar has also held several prominent directorships, including Director of On’ally Holdings PLC, Director of Tokyo Cement Colombo Terminal Ltd., and Director of the Sri Lanka Ports Authority. In addition, he is a Founding Director of the National Construction Association of Sri Lanka (NCASL), reflecting his longstanding contribution to the development of Sri Lanka’s construction and business sectors.

Joseph is a Member of the Institution of Electrical and Electronic Engineers (MIEEE) - USA, The Institution of Lighting Engineers (MILE) - UK, The New York Academy of Science (MNYAS) - USA, the Illumination Engineering Society (MIES) - USA, Incorporated Engineer - UK (IEng), Institution of Engineering Technology (MIET) - UK, American Society of Heating, Refrigerating and Air-Conditioning Engineers (MASHRAE) - USA, The Institute of Incorporated Engineers (SL), and Incorporated Engineer – SL (IEng).

He holds over 35 years of multi-faceted experience in engineering and engineering consultancy in Sri Lanka and internationally. He has held senior positions in organisations such as State Engineering Corporation, Heavy Fab Ltd., Development Consultants Lanka Ltd., Safari Company Limited Saudi Arabia and Baharudden P M S Associates, Brunei.

He currently serves as a Non-Executive Director on the Board of On’ally Holdings PLC and as an Independent, Non-Executive Director on the Board of Prime Lands Residencies PLC. He is also the Managing Partner of Cadteam and the Managing Director of N J Consultants Ltd.