Dengue on the rise

Dengue cases continue to climb despite a countywide campaign to bring them down. The number of dengue patients has exceeded 53,000 so far this year, and 31 of them have already died. The Western Province has recorded the highest dengue case burden (27,833), accounting for about 52.36% of the national tally, with more than 124 MOH (Medical Officer of Health) areas designated as high-risk zones. Health authorities have expressed fear that unless the high incidence of dengue is brought under control urgently, the hospital network may be overwhelmed.

Health authorities are reported to have found that 80% of mosquito breeding sites, identified across the country, are located in public places. About 42% of schools, inspected so far, have been found to have mosquito breeding places. Mosquito larvae density in schools surged to 63% last month, an increase from 23% recorded in April. Mosquito larvae density in government institutions is 28%. Religious places and factories have recorded larvae densities of 24% and 37%, respectively. This is a very serious situation, yet the public seems unconcerned.

Health officials are in overdrive to control the spread of dengue. They have instituted legal action against the individuals who have failed to keep their houses, gardens, factories and business places free from mosquito breeding sites and threatened to prosecute the heads of the state institutions where mosquito larvae have been found. The geographical spread of the dengue burden has made the task of fighting the disease even more challenging, stretching the resources of the health authorities thin. The Health Ministry has stated that the incidence of dengue is alarmingly high in Colombo, Kalutara, Gampaha, Matara, Galle, Hambantota, Kandy, Matale, Badulla, Batticaloa, Kurunegala, Puttalam, Ratnapura and Kegalle districts.

The task of eradicating dengue or other such diseases must not be left entirely to the health authorities, and the public has a pivotal role to play in fighting them. Active public participation in dengue eradication is half the battle in making the country safe.

Political battles must not be fought over epidemics. Sadly, the Opposition has been hauling the government over the coals for the high incidence of dengue. The JVP did likewise while out of power; its leaders thundered in Parliament, condemning previous governments for their failure to control dengue. These parties ought to help health officials fight dengue instead of waging political battles.

Some political parties claim to have hundreds of thousands of members. If so, why don’t they ask their ranks and file to help the health workers detect and destroy mosquito breeding sites in their areas, especially in public places? These parties carry out effective door-to-door propaganda campaigns in the run-up to every election, and the question is why they cannot come out in their numbers and take part in dengue control campaigns.

Meanwhile, many mosquito breeding sites have been found in public spaces, and legal action must be taken against the heads of local government institutions that have failed to keep these places free from mosquito larvae. A few days ago, the media reported on several tractor trailers full of garbage parked on the roadside for days in the Kaduwela Municipal Council area. Residents have alleged that municipal workers dump garbage haphazardly, creating mosquito breeding sites in Kaduwela. These allegations must be probed.

Health officials have detected mosquito breeding sites in public spaces in other local council areas as well, especially Colombo, where people are also complaining of a foul smell emanating from Beira Lake. If the existing laws do not provide for legal action against the heads of local government institutions and officials for their failure to eradicate mosquito breeding places in their areas, new legislation must be introduced to hold them accountable and make them face prosecution. Endangering the lives of ratepayers by exposing them to diseases is a serious offence that must not go unpunished.

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.