Blink International opens CASIO store in Kandy City Centre

Blink International (Pvt) Ltd, sole authorized distributor and service agent for Casio watches in Sri Lanka, launched its first store in Kandy in the Kandy City Centre (KCC). The store has the largest watch collection in KCC with nearly 500 watches for customers to choose from and is the only wristwatch battery replacement service provider located inside KCC.

“This is an important milestone for us. We are excited about expanding our retail footprint and to serve watch enthusiasts in Kandy. Our space in Kandy is designed to ensure that customers have a wide variety of choices and our team is equipped to help our clientele make an informed decision in line with their needs, style and budget,” noted Blink International Director Muhammed Mansoor.

Wristwatches at Blink range from from Rs. 8,000 upto Rs. 250,000 and Blink guarantees quality and authenticity with every timepiece. From the rugged reliability of G-Shock to the sophisticated allure of Sheen, there’s a perfect match for every wrist among renowned brands including Edifice, Enticer, Vintage, Youth series, and Pro-treck. The store is poised to offer visitors to KCC a feel for Blink’s selection of high-quality watches, which are designed to offer affordable luxury to fit any budget, with a knowledgeable team with high product expertise to help customers find a good fit for their style and budgets.

Established in 2015, Blink International has made a name for being a trusted Sri Lankan distributor for numerous watch brands and for bringing exquisite and authentic timepieces from a wide portfolio of genuine Casio watches in Sri Lanka.

Unilever – Lever Ayush strengthens commitment to traditional medicine as Main Sponsor of International Research Symposium at AyurEx Colombo 2024

Russian entrepreneur targeting over Rs. 7 billion investment in SL’s healthcare sector

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.