Sri Lanka Freedom Party anti-Sirisena faction, New Alliance meet for talks

ECONOMYNEXT — The faction of crisis-hit Sri Lanka Freedom Party (SLFP) led by Aviation Minister Nimal Siripala de Silva has held a round of talks with members of MP Nimal Lanza’s ‘New Alliance’ on joining forces.

Chairman of the Lanza’s New Alliance MP Anura Priyadarshana Yapa told reporters after the meeting that he expects some 70 MPs to join the new political formation.

“Today, the voter is disillusioned with the parties they had voted for.  We’re all part of the same political stream. We have a duty to create a refuge for them,” he said.

“Next month, we intend to form a new political alliance,” he added.

Asked if this brand new alliance will back the candidacy of President Ranil Wickremesinghe at the upcoming presidential election, the MP said that it’s still early days.

“To make that decision, the election date has to be announced and candidates have to come forward. We’ll leave that aside for now; the plan is to bring most people who are of the same political views to one side,” he said.

No name has been proposed for the new formation yet, said Yapa.

Asked about leadership, he said “There is no need to discuss that yet. We’re are all here with common purpose. We will reveal who is what in due course.”

SLFP stalwart Duminda Dissanayake who is with the Nimal Siripala faction of the party and is opposed to the chairmanship of former president Maithriapala Sirsiena said the SLFP has always said it plans to bring together all independent groups in parliament under one alliance.

“We held the first discussion today on that with independent MPs and party representatives. To take the country forward at this juncture, we must unite irrespective of party differences and think about the country,” he said.

“I think all parties are of that same view, but some leaders may not be,” he added.

Dissanayake said that neither the SLFP or any party who entered discussions with them has decided on a presidential candidate yet.

“But we have one message: Whoever the next president is, this group will be at the forefront of creating that president,” he said.

Among others who attended Tuesday’s meeting were MP Nimal Lanza, Education Minister Susil Premajayantha, Trade Minister Nalin Fernando,  Agriculture Minister Mahinda Amaraweera, State Minister Lasantha Alagiyawanna, State Minister Suren Raghavan and Aviation Minister Nimal Siripala De Silva. (Colombo/May15/2024)