HNB retains Euromoney recognition as SL’s Best Bank for Large Corporates

HNB Senior Vice President and Head of Corporate Banking Manojith Weerasuriya accepts the award

HNB PLC received the Best Bank for Large Corporates in Sri Lanka 2026 award at the Euromoney Awards for Excellence, marking the second consecutive year that the bank has secured the prestigious international recognition.

The award was accepted on behalf of HNB by Senior Vice President and Head of Corporate Banking Manojith Weerasuriya, reflecting the bank’s continued progress in supporting Sri Lanka’s largest corporates, multinational companies, exporters and infrastructure developers with increasingly sophisticated financial solutions.

Euromoney’s recognition builds on HNB’s expanding capabilities across corporate lending, project finance, transaction banking, trade services and cross-border financing. HNB was also named the Best Bank for Large Corporates in Sri Lanka by Euromoney in 2025.

During the award review period, HNB participated in several landmark transactions that demonstrated the increasing breadth of its corporate banking proposition. These included participation in the US $ 1 billion sustainability-linked syndicated financing for Aster Chemicals & Energy, cross-border acquisition financing involving Surge Global and Calcey Technologies and the arrangement of Rs.44.5 billion in syndicated financing for the 350MW Sobadhanavi power project.

“Being recognised as our nation’s leading corporate banking partner on such a prestigious global platform further highlights HNB’s commitment to empowering Sri Lankan businesses with the capabilities, expertise and solutions needed to navigate an evolving marketplace. By building meaningful partnerships that go beyond financing, understanding our clients’ ambitions we are better able to support their growth through innovative solutions, sector insights and global connectivity. As we continue to strengthen our corporate banking ecosystem, we remain dedicated to creating sustainable value for our clients that also helps to elevate and empower the Sri Lankan economy,” Senior Vice President and Head of Wholesale Banking Majella Rodrigo said.

HNB’s participation in the Aster Chemicals & Energy transaction also represented an important step in strengthening its involvement in complex international and sustainability-linked financing alongside leading global financial institutions.

Weerasuriya said, “Receiving this recognition for a second consecutive year is a strong endorsement of the trust our corporate clients place in HNB. Our focus has always been on understanding their businesses, anticipating their requirements and delivering solutions that extend beyond traditional financing. As Sri Lankan corporates pursue new opportunities locally and internationally, we will continue to strengthen our capabilities across financing, transaction banking, trade and digital solutions to help our clients grow sustainably and compete with confidence.”