A White Christmas in Nova Scotia

Since leaving Canada I had kept in touch with friends there. One day the phone rang; it was Jim Retson. He invited me to spend Christmas with his family in Truro, north of Halifax in Nova Scotia, a northeastern province of Canada. He had married Roberta and they had a small child.

Halifax is the main city of Nova Scotia. When I arrived at Halifax from Pittsburgh, Jim’s younger sister Mavis met me at the airport. She was very friendly hugging me warmly and invited me to spend the first few days in her apartment in Halifax instead of checking into a hotel. Her companionship was pleasant and she took me sightseeing around Halifax every day. I had the opportunity of seeing giant vessels in the Halifax harbor and we visited the old lighthouse at Peggy’s Cove.

Since Halifax was a small city, I could see most of the important places within a few days. Halifax is famous for its cold water lobster available year-round and we had lobster dinners most nights. The city was covered with several feet of snow and it was indeed a white Christmas and we took part in the celebrations which included sledding and playing ice sports. Mavis’ friends joined us in these activities which were a great delight. We sang Christmas songs, joked, and reminisced about old friends in Toronto, particularly Siva, Surjeet, Liz, and Anette.

At the end of the holiday in Halifax, Mavis and I began our drive to Truro in her diesel-powered Ford Fiesta. Along the way heavy snowing began and not long after the car broke down on the highway. Mavis raised the bonnet and inspected the engine with me helping. She joked that since I was an engineer I should be able to fix the car. I explained that being an engineer did not necessarily mean that I had experience with automotive mechanics. Those days there were no cellphones and I worked on the car, removing and reassembling various cables and tubes, and eventually got it running. Afterward, I drove the car myself thanking the divine forces for my repair being successful.

We spent Christmas in Jim’s parents home with his siblings and family. They were Anglicans while Jim’s wife Roberta was of Italian Catholic descent. At first his parents were not supportive of their marriage on religious grounds but the disapproval faded after their first child was born. Mavis’ older sister was married to an African-American and they had two adopted daughters.

The women were busy in the kitchen preparing various Christmas dishes, including black pudding, a kind of blood sausage originating in the UK and Ireland, while the men enjoyed beer, snacks, and played card games, darts, and carom. Jim’s younger brother was in the 12th grade and was very friendly with me. He invited me to join him on a hunting trip. I hesitated at first saying I did not like to kill animals, but eventually joined him. He reassured me that we would only shoot at targets, not animals. The hunting experience turned out to be enjoyable and a great physical exercise too.

When we returned from the hunting trip we were quite exhausted and hungry. We took a bath, dressed in clean clothes, and went to the table for dinner. Before eating, the responsibility of saying grace to thank God for the food on the table fell on Mavis. Stealing a line from a play she had seen in Halifax, Mavis loudly exclaimed, “rub-a-dub-dub, thanks for the grub,” making everyone burst into laughter.

“Mavis remains crazy,” Jim remarked. This was the night before Christmas. They had given me a separate room, where I went to bed. In the night, Mavis came to my room. We chatted for a long time and at the end Mavis kissed me good night.

The next day, it was time to open gifts. I had brought small gifts for Mavis and Jim but I received many extravagant presents from everyone in the family. There wasn’t enough space in my bags to carry all of that after parting with them the following day. I headed back to Pittsburgh with a sense of joy and sorrow as Mavis had high expectations of me. However, as the saying goes, long-distance relationships seldom find their way.

My PhD research focused on the dynamics and control of automated guideway transit (AGT) systems. These vehicles are completely automated, and hence driverless. They run on elevated guideways and don’t interfere with other traffic. So, AGT had been an attractive area of research at the time.

Robotics was emerging at the same time yet was not properly recognized. I wanted to enter the field but it was clear to me that such research has to be in collaboration with mechanical and electrical engineers and computer scientists. So I was somewhat hesitant. Fortunately, Raj Reddy, a professor of Computer Science at CMU, recognized the importance of robotics and needed interdepartmental collaboration. He contacted some of us who had the right research background in the departments of mechanical and electrical engineering and computer science to work together in robotics. We were quite excited.

To initiate research we needed funds, particularly for graduate students and equipment. I suggested approaching Westinghouse Electric because it was a leading and very rich company that was focusing on domestic appliances and heavy equipment; also since I had already done some consulting work on nuclear power plant equipment with a branch of Westinghouse in Pittsburgh. Reddy thought we should approach the Westinghouse office in Winston Salem, North Carolina instead as they controlled finances and were very powerful. We agreed, and decided to visit Winston Salem and make a presentation to Westinghouse with a comprehensive proposal to establish a Robotics Institute at CMU.

Westinghouse in Pittsburgh gave us two small commuter planes, single-engine and twin-engine Cessna aircraft, for the trip. Raj asked three of us to take the small plane and leave first and the remaining five including himself would follow in the bigger plane. We landed in Winston Salem and waited for the other plane but it didn’t arrive. There were no cellphones in those days. So, we had to find a land phone somewhere and make a call to CMU. That plane had lost an engine en route and had to return, so the other group was still waiting for a replacement plane from Westinghouse.

Eventually everyone arrived, made an effective presentation to the Westinghouse executives and the company committed itself to fund the Robotics Institute at CMU. This was the first such institute anywhere and we grew steadily becoming world-renowned and even started granting CMU PhDs in Robotics. The rest is history!

In Sri Lanka I have collaborated with the Open University (OUSL) and the University of Moratuwa (UM) in various activities of engineering, particularly robotics and AI. For example, I have provided scholarships (research assistantships) for their faculty members to carry out Master’s, Doctoral, and Post-doctoral research in my laboratory at the University of British Columbia (UBC). They collaborated with others in my laboratory and outside in their research and gain significant expertise before leaving my group.

Fortunately, some of them have returned to Sri Lanka and are carrying out good research and development. My students who have returned to Sri Lanka include Lalith Gamage, who is now a Professor in Sri Lanka and heads Sri Lanka Institute of Information Technology (SLIIT) and Nalin Wickramarachchi who served as Dean of Engineering at UM.

Some general applications of robotics are equally important to developing countries as well as more advanced states. However, we should not blindly decide on what we do in developing countries just for the sake of being involved in robotics or AI. We must explore and determine what is in the “black box.” (In robotics, “black box” typically refers to two distinct concepts: opaque AI algorithms whose internal decision-making is hidden, or physical “flight recorders” designed to log data and investigate accidents

Otherwise we can be dissuaded through fear of the way ahead or make wrong choices for robotic activities. We must first question whether robotics is needed for a specific application and then explore what approaches are relevant for the task in hand. Very importantly, we must examine what is in the existing black box and what is already available before implementing new methodology.

I suggest that developing countries like Sri Lanka should concentrate on “robot development” not their application for automation of local industries. We can market such robots to many other countries. Since we have a strong and smart labor force in Sri Lanka, using robots for such applications as agriculture and industrial automation is not generally suitable. Instead, we should consider the development of simple and low-cost robots for local use (e.g., for service and household applications). Also, we must focus on the development of advanced and efficient software, incorporation of other forms of intelligence into robots, and the use of advanced tools like Flexible Cloud, Real-time Internet of Things (IoT), and Edge AI.

These depend on large amounts of data. But data has many shortcomings such as (1) they concern the past, not present or future; (2) they can be inaccurate, incomplete, or qualitative; (3) they can be qualitative and fuzzy. We should consider other aspects of data, for example “domain transformation.” Here, it is known that the “source domain” where the data is collected is not typically the same as the “action domain” where the data is applied (used). Other aspects of robots like self-awareness have to be researched as well.

Software developments can be accomplished without much capital investment, as is done in India, particularly because many developing countries have highly educated and smart engineers, technicians, and computer scientists. Also, we should focus on advancing the “mechanical capabilities” of robots, which are essential but not just for the local market. Very importantly, we should develop our own guidelines and regulations for robotic ethics and safety which can be done by modifying and enhancing the existing guidelines and regulations in other jurisdictions to suit the local requirements.

People’s Bank expands digital banking network with 125th cheque deposit kiosk

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.