Former AG joins CT Land Development Board

CT Land Development PLC has appointed Chulantha Wickramaratne to its Board as an Independent Non-Executive Director.

Wickramaratne is an accomplished senior professional with over 35 years of leadership in public sector finance, audit, governance, and institutional reform. Most recently, he served as the Auditor General (AG) of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka from 2019 to 2025.

He is a Fellow Member of the Institute of Chartered Accountants of Sri Lanka (CA Sri Lanka), a qualified accountant with the Chartered Institute of Public Finance and Accountancy (CIPFA) UK, an Associate Member of the Institute of Certified Management Accountants of Sri Lanka (ICMA Sri Lanka), and holds a Bachelor of Commerce (Special) degree with Second Class Upper Division honours from the University of Kelaniya, Sri Lanka, awarded in 1991.

As AG, Wickramaratne oversaw complex audits of Government Ministries and Departments, public corporations, and State-owned enterprises (SOEs), and functioned as a principal adviser to Parliamentary Oversight Committees, including the Committee on Public Accounts (COPA) and Committee on Public Enterprises (COPE). He also has extensive international exposure through governmental and private sector assignments.

Wickramaratne played critical roles in legislative reform and public sector capacity building, including the introduction of advanced audit methodologies and digital audit management systems in Sri Lanka. He also designed and implemented a Code of Ethics and spearheaded HR reforms within the National Audit Office. In addition, he served as a Council Member of CA Sri Lanka, a member of the Public Sector Accounting Standards Committee, and a member of the Board of Management of the Association of Public Finance Accountants of Sri Lanka (APFASL).

After retiring from the position of AG, Wickramaratne entered the corporate sector, taking up appointments as an Independent Non-Executive Director at CT Holdings PLC and later at Cargills (Ceylon) PLC.