SLT-Mobitel empowers EDEX Mid-Year Expo 2024 as official ICT solutions partner

SLT-Mobitel, demonstrating a strong commitment to nurturing education and career development in Sri Lanka, partnered with the EDEX Mid-Year Expo 2024 as its official ICT solutions partner.

A landmark event in Sri Lanka’s educational calendar, SLT-Mobitel provided robust Wi-Fi connectivity throughout the exhibition, ensuring seamless digital experiences for exhibitors and attendees.

The event reaffirms SLT-Mobitel’s reputation as a key player in the ICT industry, with an emphasis on its support of education and professional development. The exhibition also highlights SLT-Mobitel’s commitment to endorsing students, educators, and institutions as they explore global educational opportunities in real time. An effort that further invests in the future of Sri Lanka’s workforce and youth.

This year’s EDEX Mid-Year Expo celebrates 20 years of empowering Sri Lankan youth. Recognising recent strides in excellence, the exhibition focused on innovation and sustainability, offering a comprehensive platform for students to explore local and global learning prospects.

Participants were able to interact with representatives from local and foreign universities, tertiary and vocational training institutes. The Expo also provided free career guidance, psychometric testing, and access to initiatives, including the EDEX Think Green Initiative, which promotes sustainable practices, and the EDEX Nenapahana Community Outreach Program. Additional forms of support were open, including the EDEX Entrepreneur Zone, a platform for aspiring business leaders.

As the official ‘ICT solutions partner’, SLT-Mobitel leveraged the opportunity to bridge the digital divide in education, showcasing how technology can transform learning. The partnership with EDEX underscores the role of cutting-edge ICT solutions in creating a more inclusive educational landscape. SLT-Mobitel’s’s involvement with the exhibition continues its efforts at preparing Sri Lankan students for the digital age through enhanced connectivity and accessibility.