EDB, IFC and EU strengthen export readiness of Eastern SMEs

The Sri Lanka Export Development Board (EDB), in collaboration with the International Finance Corporation (IFC) and the European Union (EU), successfully conducted the 7th Provincial ExpoNavigator Program under the Sri Lanka Export Excellence Initiative (SLEEI) 2026 on 9–10 June 2026 in Batticaloa.

Implemented under the EU’s regional program ‘Accelerating Climate Smart and Inclusive Infrastructure in South Asia (ACSIIS)’, the initiative aims to enhance the export readiness and competitiveness of small and medium enterprises (SMEs), enabling their entry to international markets.

Held in conjunction with International MSME Day 2026, the two-day event brought together nearly 100 export-potential entrepreneurs from the Eastern Province. Participants engaged in awareness sessions, technical consultations and personalised business advisory services designed to help position businesses for export markets.

As a flagship c of the Sri Lanka Export Excellence Initiative (SLEEI), the ExpoNavigator Program has now reached seven provinces –Western, North-Western, Northern, Southern, Sabaragamuwa, Uva and Eastern Provinces –focusing on identifying high potential SMEs  and connecting them with the technical expertise, finance and institutional support needed to scale up for export.

Despite strong potential in agriculture, fisheries, food processing, coconut-based products, spices, manufacturing and other value-added industries, the Eastern Province remains significantly underrepresented in Sri Lanka's export sector, accounting for less than one percent of registered exporters. While the Province currently contributes about 5% to national GDP, there is both clear potential and a pressing need to strengthen its role to reach the 8% target by 2030.

Through interactive awareness sessions and a dedicated Business Clinic, SMEs engaged directly with experts from the EDB and partner institutions on export readiness, product development, branding, packaging, quality standards, certification requirements, market intelligence and access to finance. The clinic also helped identify high-potential enterprises for continued, targeted support under SLEEI.

By delivering export development services directly to the provinces, the ExpoNavigator Program is helping build a more diversified, resilient and inclusive export economy while creating new opportunities for regional businesses to participate in global value chains.