Mastercard announces leadership changes

Aims to accelerate growth across five key markets in South Asia

From left: Group Country Manager Sri Lanka, Maldives, Bangladesh, Nepal and Bhutan Sandun Hapugoda and Country Manager Sri Lanka Mahesha Amarasuriya

Mastercard has announced significant leadership appointments aimed at strengthening South Asia operations, by creating a more integrated model for Sri Lanka, the Maldives, Bangladesh, Nepal and Bhutan.

The growing synergies within these countries, especially with regard to the focus on tourism and cross-border trade and payments innovation, makes this integration crucial in scaling the operations and underscores the company’s commitment to unlocking shared growth opportunities across these markets.

Effective immediately, Sandun Hapugoda will assume an expanded leadership role as Group Country Manager overseeing Sri Lanka, the Maldives, Bangladesh, Nepal and Bhutan. In this capacity, he will lead Mastercard’s engagements across these markets, with a focus on deepening partnerships and accelerating digital transformation.

Hapugoda has successfully supported Mastercard’s business in Sri Lanka and Maldives, delivering strong market growth and strengthening the company’s position as a trusted partner to the ecosystem. He brings extensive experience across payments, digital banking, fintech, blockchain and open banking. He has also contributed to national policy and innovation through roles on committees of the Central Bank of Sri Lanka, Technology Ministry and National Science Foundation, among others. Hapugoda currently serves as President of the American Chamber of Commerce in Sri Lanka.

Hapugoda will continue to report to Mastercard Division President South Asia Gautam Aggarwal.

Mahesha Amarasuriya has been promoted to Country Manager for Sri Lanka, reporting to Hapugoda. Amarasuriya has been with Mastercard for four years as Director for Sri Lanka, supporting the initiatives to expand digital payments and accelerate financial inclusion. With over 23 years of experience in corporate banking, retail and private banking, cards and electronic payments, she brings deep expertise and leadership to her new role.

She holds a BA (Hons) from the University of Colombo and an MBA from the Postgraduate Institute of Management, University of Sri Jayewardenepura, where she graduated as valedictorian. She has also served in leadership roles across professional bodies including the CIMA Global Council and has been recognised with multiple industry accolades.