Some vehicle traders ‘more equal’?

SJB MP Mujibur Rahman has alleged in Parliament that on the eve of the announcement of a 50% customs duty surcharge on vehicle imports, Letters of Credit (LCs) for 1,782 vehicles had been opened by three close associates of President Anura Kumara Dissanayake. Previously, the Opposition claimed that the number of LCs opened on that day exceeded 4,000.

Rahman said the number of LCs opened during the week prior to the announcement of the surcharge mounted to 4,000. The government and the Opposition have locked horns over the issue. It has also been claimed in some quarters that some other vehicle importers also benefited from inside information.

It may not be fair to level sweeping allegations against all vehicle importers. They watch foreign exchange rates, particularly the depreciation of the rupee, global issues and trends, and respond accordingly without the benefit of inside information. When the rupee began to tumble, some vehicle importers may have expected the government to resort to drastic measures, such as import restrictions, to manage the situation. It is natural that traders place bigger orders when the rupee shows signs of continuous weakening. Vehicle importers are no exception.

When it became clear that the rupee free fall would last for a while, vehicle importers may have opened more LCs. That is the name of the game in the business world. It is a gamble, though. If the West Asia conflict goes away by any chance, with the global oil markets stabilising and prices returning close to the pre-war levels, the rupee will rally and the vehicles, imported during the rupee depreciation, may not fetch the desired prices and the importers may not get the expected returns on their investment in such an eventuality. Even ordinary consumers react in a similar manner and stock up on goods that are expected to be in short supply. Most filling stations hide their stocks on the eve of monthly fuel price revisions, for the trend is for the fuel prices to increase in this country. They have no need for inside information to do so. They go by market trends and act with impunity to profiteer. Some of them also place bigger fuel orders towards the end of every month, expecting price increases.

However, the possibility of some vehicle importers having benefited from their political connections and received inside information about the customs duty surcharge in advance cannot be ruled out. Even Budget secrets are leaked to some businesses in this country. Financiers of successive governments have earned billions of rupees in profit by hoarding cigarettes in the run-up to Budgets that increased tobacco prices. Political leaders are known to work hand in glove with business leaders.

As for the allegation that the incumbent government leaked information about the duty surcharge to its cronies, what needs to be examined is whether there were unusually large vehicle orders placed in the run-up to the announcement of the surcharge, and whether the importers concerned are known to have links to the ruling coalition. If only a few vehicle importers who backed the JVP-NPP election campaigns placed huge vehicle orders just days before the surcharge was imposed, it could raise questions of favouritism. A graph showing the number of vehicles imported by leading traders, especially the ones with political links, during the past month may reveal unusual patterns, if any.

Now that the Opposition has levelled a very serious allegation against the government and some companies, the burden is on it to support its claim with facts and figures. The government ought to make all necessary information available if it has nothing to hide.

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.