Day and postponement Vesak 2026

May Day can mean one of many things. In European countries it is a festival, dating back nearly a thousand years, celebrating the beginning of the summer. People across the UK, especially in villages, hold fetes on 1st of May, celebrating May Day in different ways including maypole dancing, Morris dancing and the crowning of a May Queen. In many other countries it is a celebration of the International Labour Day, its origin dating back to the 1886 Haymarket Affair in Chicago where workers striking for an eight-hour day faced violent suppression, resulting in many deaths and the execution of some labour leaders. Sri Lanka is among around 80 countries celebrating this event of worker’s solidarity though it has become highly politicised, unfortunately.

On the other hand, ‘mayday’ repeated thrice, is the universal call sign for distress used by aviators and sailors, other emergency services too adopting this in some countries.

01 May this year was an interesting day for Sri Lanka, posing a big problem as the first full moon day of Vesak fell on the International Labour Day. Whilst the rest of the world, including the UN, celebrated the birth, Enlightenment and the Parinibbana of the Buddha on this day, Sri Lanka decided to postpone this to the second full moon day, falling on 30th May. In fact, originally Vesak was to be celebrated on the 1st but it was postponed to the 30th, on the advice of the Mahanayakas of the three Nikayas, though some politicians alleged it to be a government decision. Logically, 30 May should have been the Adhi Vesak Poya day, as Adhi Poya refers to an extra Poya day in the Buddhist Lunar calendar, inserted to synchronise with the solar calendar. Whatever it may be, it suited the government politicians as they were able to celebrate May Day, in many venues as a departure from the usual practice of a mega rally, whilst some political parties decided instead to indulge in religious affairs on the day. Perhaps, it suited them well too as they may not have been able to muster large crowds for rallies, in view of the dire economic situation.

What transpired at the government May Day rallies raises the spectre of a mayday, no doubt!  However, what is not sure is whether the danger is to the government or to the electoral process. Perhaps, it is for both, as a failing government may look for alternatives to democracy. Wonder whether the words of Tilvin Silva, the power behind the throne, would turn out to be prophetic. Addressing one of the many NPP May Day rallies, he proclaimed to the applause of his supporters that there would be no future governments. After a pause he added that the opposition does not know how to form a government. Whether he did so to soften the blow or on the realisation that he had dropped a clanger, we do not know!

External factors like the Iran war are compounding the self-imposed problems of the government through inexperience as well as corruption. At another May Day rally, PM Harini made the surprising claim that they had pulled the country out of the economic mess when all that they had done was to continue with the agreements signed by Ranil with the IMF. The election promise was that they would renegotiate terms to bring relief to the public which they seem to have conveniently forgotten and the masses are much worse off.

The NPP’s victory was mainly on the promise of good governance but their actions. Just like their predecessors, whom they criticised heavily, they seem to go all out to defend their corrupt colleagues. The rot started with the appointment of the Speaker who claimed to have a doctorate. But he is still an MP! Replacement seems no better, if what is rumoured is true.

AKD promised the abolition of the presidency, but rather than honouring that promise, he seems hell-bent on heading towards a dictatorship. He is chasing after political enemies using the Seneviratna Abeysekara duo, pulled out of retirement to be installed in high positions, in spite of pending allegations! Either, he does not understand the concept of the separation of the executive, legislature and the judiciary for good governance or has taken it for granted. During May Day celebrations, AKD told his supporters to wait to cheer when a judgement is given in a corruption case where a directive has been issued to hand over the verdict within a month. This led to heavy criticism from the opposition and a belated response from BASL but usually vociferous AKD remains silent!

AKD has failed miserably as the finance minister. The report on the 323 containers released without the mandatory Customs inspections is still held in secrecy, just like MOUs signed with the USA and India. Mishandling of the payment to Australia is still shrouded in mystery and tainted by the death of one of the suspended treasury officials. He is supposed to have committed suicide by slicing three vital arteries; an act almost impossible!

A government that came to power, raising the expectations of the public extremely high, seems to be failing. If there is a change of government, there is a great likelihood that many in the ranks of this government too may join the corrupt in jail, as this government lost the promised squeaky-clean image quite a while ago.

There are rumours that the government is hunting for talent in the ranks of the opposition, not something expected of a government that claims to have walking encyclopaedias of every description in its ranks!

In this scenario, the million-dollar question is whether the government would do everything possible not to have elections. Will it be “mayday, mayday, mayday” for democracy?

TOXIC WATERS: How Galle’s rivers are becoming invisible hotspots for superbugs and disease risk

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.