LOLCTECH earns national spotlight with a Gold and Overall Bronze in ICT sector

LOLC Technologies (LOLCTECH), the pioneering force in transformative technologies and the digital backbone of the LOLC Group, Sri Lanka’s largest and most diversified conglomerate has been honoured with two prestigious national accolades at the National Business Excellence Awards (NBEA) 2025, marking the first national awards in the company’s history. The awarding ceremony was held on 24th July 2025 at the Shangri-La Colombo.

LOLCTECH has transformed from an internal support role into a self-sustaining, independently operated technology company. Today, it serves over 15,000 users locally and internationally across LOLC’s extensive operations. LOLCTECH is also LOLC Group’s centralised shared IT Service Provider, supporting the Group across a wide spectrum of Information Technology and Security services in Sri Lanka and over 26+ countries.

The company has developed four key next-generation products, each carrying LOLC owned intellectual property, which is being leveraged internally across the Group and externally, including on international platforms. These innovations include “FusionX,” Sri Lanka’s first next-gen co-banking platform; “OASYS,” for business process orchestration; the “iHUB,” a universal business interface; and “iPay,” the country’s largest online payment platform. Together, these intellectual properties show LOLCTECH’s ability to provide technology solutions that are ready for the future and have a significant impact, both locally and globally.

Chairman of LOLC Technologies, Mr. Conrad Dias shared his joy at this remarkable accomplishment, remarking, “This recognition emphasis the strength of LOLCTECH’s holistic evaluation and its incredible 20 year journey.

Typically less strong stocks drive the stock market amid profit takings

Sri Lanka’s international recognition flies high as the Colombo International Kite Festival ends up on a successful note

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.