Sri Lanka takes AsiaBerlin by storm showcasing innovation & startup potential

Sri Lanka captured global attention at the AsiaBerlin Summit 2025, showcasing the country’s expanding innovation and startup potential. Through a dynamic delegation of tech companies and high-level networking, the country demonstrated the strength, adaptability, and entrepreneurial spirit driving its digital economy.

The Summit provided a platform to position Sri Lanka’s innovation ecosystem and build meaningful connections in Europe, emphasising the role as an emerging partner in the international startup community.

Sri Lanka’s relationship with the AsiaBerlin Forum began in April 2021, when H.E. Ms. Manori Unambuwe, then Sri Lanka’s Ambassador to Germany, facilitated the signing of an MoU between the AsiaBerlin Forum and the Information and Communication Technology Agency of Sri Lanka (ICTA). That partnership led to the first Sri Lanka Satellite Event at AsiaBerlin Forum 2021, laying groundwork for what would become an increasingly substantial presence.

Backed by the Export Development Board (EDB), the collaboration deepened through 2023 and 2024, with Sri Lankan delegations attending both summits and engaged in founder development programs, investor matchmaking, and market access initiatives.

However, 2025 marked a turning point with Sri Lanka making a strong impression at the AsiaBerlin Summit 2025. Under the leadership of Dr. Hans Wijayasuriya, Chief Advisor to the President on Digital Economy, a Sri Lankan delegation of 11 innovative technology companies representing healthtech, biotech, HRtech, greentech, e-mobility, fintech, deeptech, and the creative industries, showcased the country’s innovative ecosystem, building valuable connections in Europe.

CSE donates LKR 25 million to post-Ditwah “Rebuilding Sri Lanka” fund

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.