Sri Lanka’s Sling solar-powered EV battery project wins US award

ECONOMYNEXT – The USAID-funded Sri Lanka Energy Project (SLEP) has received an innovation award at the 2024 annual conference for the Society for International Development (SID-US), for its solar-powered electric vehicle battery swapping stations.

Owned and operated by Sling Mobility (Pvt) Ltd, the stations were recognized for their impact on sustainable urban mobility and economic development in the country, the US embassy said in a statement.

Sling’s ‘360° Sustainable Mobility’ project provides cost-effective and efficient solutions to the retail logistics sector through a smart electric vehicle ecosystem, which reduces the high initial costs of buying batteries and e-bikes by offering a battery subscription service.

Sling Mobility’s collaboration with Uber for food delivery services has demonstrated the model’s effectiveness in reducing downtime for riders, saving money and time, the company said.

Their station located at the Center for Women’s Research in Colombo, which generates income to support the center’s activities, was highlighted by SID-US in particular.

“This is such a great example of innovation, renewable energy, private sector development, and women’s empowerment,” US Ambassador Julie Chung said, at a ceremony to present the Innovation Competition Award to representatives from SLEP and Sling Mobility.

“SLING Mobility’s collaboration with USAID marks a significant step towards a sustainable and green future for urban mobility in Sri Lanka,” Sling Chief Executive Officer Love Yadav said.

USAID SLEP’s assistance focuses on economically disadvantaged and marginalized populations, promoting their involvement in the retail logistics sector through electric vehicle use.

The initiative has trained 18 drivers, assisted 10 individuals in obtaining driver’s licenses, and conducted four outreach activities for over 100 participants.

The USAID Sri Lanka Energy Program supports transforming Sri Lanka’s power sector into a market-based, secure, reliable, and sustainable system by mobilizing investment to deploy advanced technologies, increase flexibility, and enhance competitiveness, the embassy said.  (Colombo/Jun14/2024)