Finch Foods showcases the finest of Sri Lanka at Bandaranaike International Airport

Finch Foods has officially opened its premium travel retail outlet at Bandaranaike International Airport, marking a significant milestone in the company’s journey to build a globally recognized Sri Lankan food brand. Located within the Departure/Transit Duty Free area, the outlet has been designed to showcase the finest ingredients, flavours and gifting collections from Sri Lanka to international travelers.

The new outlet brings together a curated range of premium Ceylon products, including cinnamon, vanilla, botanicals, natural wellness products, superfoods, authentic Sri Lankan spices, artisan food products, premium honey, natural oils and exclusive gifting collections. Designed as an immersive retail experience, the outlet celebrates Sri Lanka’s rich agricultural heritage, craftsmanship and culinary identity while presenting them through a modern premium brand experience.

For Finch Foods, the opening represents more than the launch of a new retail outlet. Establishing a permanent presence at Sri Lanka’s international gateway provides the brand with a powerful platform to introduce international travellers to value-added Sri Lankan products. It also reinforces the company’s long-term vision of taking the finest of Sri Lanka to the world through innovation, premium branding and global market access.

Commenting on the launch, Fawaz Fassi, Managing Director of Finch Foods, said, “The opening of our outlet at Bandaranaike International Airport is a proud milestone in the Finch Foods journey. More than a retail outlet, it is a platform to introduce millions of international travelers to the very best of Sri Lanka and demonstrate how our country’s finest ingredients can become globally recognized branded products.”

HNB General Insurance becomes the only General Insurer named among Sri Lanka’s 50 Best Workplaces™ 2026 by Great PlaceTo Work®

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.