Singer opens 1st ever Samsung AI powered smart store in Sri Lanka

In a groundbreaking move to revolutionize the technological landscape of Sri Lanka, Singer Sri Lanka has unveiled the country’s first AI-powered smart electronics in partnership with Samsung. This Samsung SmartThings store by Singer, located on Level 3 of the One Galle Face Mall, is set to redefine how Sri Lankans experience AI-powered technology and smart living solutions.

The opening, held on December 17, 2024, marks a significant milestone in the longstanding partnership between Singer Sri Lanka and Samsung. The event was graced by Mohan Pandithage, Chairman of Hayleys PLC, and SangHwa Song, Managing Director of Samsung Sri Lanka, Sabry Ansar – Director and Head of CE Biz, Samsung Sri Lanka, Thushara Rathnaweera – Deputy General Manager and Head of MX Biz, Samsung Sri Lanka and Mahesh Wijewardene, CEO of Singer Group. Their presence underscored the shared commitment of both companies toward innovation and excellence.

The Singer-Samsung SmartThings store is a one-stop destination for a wide range of AI-powered devices, catering to high-end, tech-savvy consumers. From Samsung smart TVs, refrigerators, washing machines and Galaxy smartphones to advanced home automation systems, the store’s offerings are designed to empower lifestyles through cutting-edge technology. This initiative aligns with Singer’s dedication to enhancing and enriching the lives of Sri Lankans by fostering smarter and more connected living experiences.

Adding to this, Mahesh Wijewardene, CEO of Singer Group, stated: “Our partnership with Samsung has always been about bringing the best global innovations to Sri Lanka. The launch of the Samsung SmartThings store reflects our vision to deliver intelligent solutions that enhance everyday life. We are proud to lead the way in redefining how technology transforms homes and lifestyles and proud to be the first to bring this to Sri Lanka.

Commenting on the launch, SangHwa Song, the Managing Director of Samsung Sri Lanka stated: “We are thrilled to bring the Samsung SmartThings experience to Sri Lanka for the first time. This store is a celebration of our shared vision with Singer to drive technological innovation and enhance lives through smarter solutions. Together, we aim to set a new standard in smart living.”

The Samsung Smart Things store is thoughtfully designed to cater to the needs of modern consumers who seek advanced solutions for a connected lifestyle. It offers an immersive experience, enabling customers to interact with and explore the full potential of Samsung’s smart ecosystem.

The unveiling of the Samsung SmartThings store is a testament to the forward-thinking vision of Singer Sri Lanka and Samsung. By bringing cutting-edge technology to the doorstep of Sri Lankans, the two industry giants reaffirm their commitment to fostering progress and enriching lives.

DIMO wins two prestigious awards at the 2025 Weichai Lovol Global Partners Conference

CCPI-based headline inflation continued to remain in negative territory in December 2024

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.