Alabama: Triumph for Trumpmandering

US President Donald Trump’s recent statement at a business summit that he would leave the White House in eight or nine years is widely considered a light-hearted remark intended to provoke his critics. It has apparently had the desired impact, but it has also evoked the dreadful memories of his refusal to concede defeat after losing the 2020 presidential election, his unruly supporters’ attacks on the US Capitol, and his previous statements that he would seek a third term. The US Constitution prevents any American President from seeking a third term and is robust enough to keep the likes of Trump in check. But Trump and his fellow Republicans are doing everything in their power to win the upcoming midterm elections and have employed some controversial methods to achieve that goal.

President Trump, who is trying to redraw the world map, according to his whims and fancies, to expand the US territory, as part of his grandiose MAGA initiative, has resorted to gerrymandering (or ‘Trumpmandering’) in the name of redistricting to make his Republican Party great. On Monday, his party’s efforts to secure an undue advantage at the midterm elections by resorting to gerrymandering tactics such as “cracking” and “packing” voters in some states, received a judicial boost.

On Monday, the US Supreme Court allowed the Alabama Republicans to pursue a new electoral map that will be more favourable to them in the midterm elections due in November. The apex court ruling was reportedly split 6–3 along ideological lines; six conservative justices formed the majority while the court’s three liberal justices dissented, according to media reports. It has overturned a lower court decision and narrowed the landmark Voting Rights Act. The lower court had decided that the Republicans’ preferred electoral map intentionally discriminated against Black voters and unlawfully diluted their voting power.

The main allegation against the Republicans’ electoral map, which will now become official, thanks to the Supreme Court endorsement, is that it seeks to “pack” or cram many Black voters into a single district while “cracking” (distributing) other Black communities across several white-majority districts. Observers have pointed out that the Republican strategy will prevent the Black voters from electing candidates of their choice in a fair manner although they make up about 25% of Alabama’s population. The Republican redistricting plan is antithetical to the democratic ideals the US claims to cherish.

Alabama has been at the centre of the US racial conflict and civil rights campaigns by Blacks and therefore regarded as the cradle of defining battles of the American civil rights movement. Black Americans in Alabama were victims of racial segregation in schools and public transport, barbaric violence unleashed by the Ku Klux Klan, disenfranchisement and economic exclusion. It was the intense civil rights struggles in Alabama that brought Black rights icons such as Rosa Parks and Martin Luther King, Jr. into the national spotlight. The situation has improved significantly thanks to civil rights struggles and pathbreaking judicial decisions, but Alabama is not totally free from tensions over racial inequality, and therefore it is feared that the Supreme Court decision under discussion will weaken the Voting Rights Act to the extent of paving the way for the revival of discriminatory practices such as voter suppression and diluting the political influence of the Blacks. One can only hope that what is feared will not come to pass.

The Supreme Court endorsement of the controversial redistricting map is sure to have implications for other states. The legal victory for the Republicans’ efforts signals a wider issue that severely erodes the credibility and legitimacy of the US as a leading democracy and its campaign for promoting global democracy. How would the US have reacted if a government in the Global South had resorted to gerrymandering? It would have condemned such a move in the strongest possible terms and pontificated on the virtues of democracy and the need to respect the rights of all communities. The protection of civil rights, like charity, should begin at home.

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.