Würth Lanka reaffirms brand partnership with racing icon Ashan Silva

Würth Lanka (Pvt) Ltd, the leader in the automotive aftermarket space, recently renewed its longstanding partnership with Sri Lankan racing ace and icon – Ashan Silva as Brand & Product Ambassador for the year 2025/26 for their range of products and solutions in Sri Lanka.

Ashan is one of the most successful racing aces in Sri Lanka, having won many accolades both locally and internationally. In 2024, Ashan was recognized on the podium as being the fastest Mini in the world at an event held in the United Kingdom. Furthermore, he was able to win in all the races that he participated in the current year up to date, including at the Mahameruwa Rally Cross 1, Mahameruwa Rally Cross 2, and the Walawe Super Cross.

“We are delighted to renew our relationship with racing icon Ashan Silva as the Brand and Product Ambassador for the Würth range of products and solutions. His dedication to performance, precision, and power perfectly reflects Würth’s commitment to excellence. We wish him well in his future competitions,” said Suranga Kekuluwalage – Managing Director, Würth Lanka (Pvt) Ltd.

Ashan has always been carrying Würth products as a Champions’ Choice — a true testament to the quality trusted by champions.

“I have been using Würth products since 2011. Würth’s high-quality products help me to keep my vehicle in top racing condition and have been a crucial factor in my success over the years on Sri Lankan as well as overseas racing circuits. I am grateful to the Würth Lanka team for having recognized my capabilities at the start of my career and continuing to support me over the years. It is indeed my honour and pleasure to be re-appointed as Würth’s brand ambassador for the year 2025/26,” said racing icon and Brand & Product Ambassador for Würth products, Ashan Silva.

Established in 1998, Würth Lanka (Pvt) Ltd is a fully owned subsidiary of Würth International, AG, and belongs to Adolf Würth GmbH, Germany, the parent company of the Würth Group. Würth is a Euro 20 billion company and one of the largest international trading companies with more than 400 subsidiaries in 80 countries. With over 87,000 employees worldwide, Würth has the largest direct sales force to be closer to its customers.

Health and wellbeing of employees focused on as core business drivers

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.