CFA Society Sri Lanka to celebrate excellence in capital markets at 13th Annual Awards

The 13th annual CFA Society Sri Lanka Capital Market Awards is scheduled to be held on 10 September at Cinnamon Grand, Colombo. Since its inception in 2012, the Awards have recognized and celebrated excellence across Sri Lanka’s capital markets.

This year’s event also coincides with the 25th anniversary of CFA Society Sri Lanka, marking a quarter century of the Society’s contributions to the professional development of investment professionals and the advancement of Sri Lanka’s capital markets. The 2026 edition of the CFA Society Sri Lanka Capital Market Awards features Simon Ng, CFA, as the keynote speaker, who serves as the APAC South Presidents Council Representative, CFA Institute.

An Immediate Past President of CFA Society Singapore with a distinguished career spanning nearly three decades, he has established himself as a leader in quantitative investing and wealth management, currently serving as Chief Executive Officer and Chief Investment Officer of Peak Capital Management Pte. Ltd.  His keynote address will examine the current state and future sustainability of the Sri Lankan economy, drawing insights and parallels from Singapore’s economic development experience. He will also explore the evolving role of the private sector and capital markets in supporting sustainable economic growth going forward.

In addition, CFA Society Sri Lanka is glad to welcome Reseena Abdullah, Regional Director, Society Relations-APAC, CFA Institute, who will also be in attendance at the Awards this year.

In her role, Reseena collaborates closely with CFA societies across the Asia-Pacific region to develop and execute strategic market plans that enhance member value and elevate the CFA brand. She also partners with societies to drive impactful local engagements and ensure robust governance practices throughout the society network.

CFA Institute is the global association of investment professionals that sets the standard for professional excellence and credentials with more than 200,000 charterholders worldwide across 160 markets. Founded in 2001, CFA Society Sri Lanka is a not-for-profit organization supporting the professional development and advancement of CFA charterholders and candidates in Sri Lanka.  Its membership of over 250 members consists of CEOs, CFOs, portfolio managers, equity analysts, banking professionals, investment advisors and other senior-ranking financial practitioners, and about 500 candidates, primarily from the financial sector.