Quality of capital formation seen as key to economic growth

The quality of capital formation is critical for Sri Lanka’s economic growth trajectory and the next take-off would be nothing but investment because without investments the country can’t expect rapid economic growth, Labour Minister and Economic Development Deputy Minister Dr. Anil Jayantha Fernando said.

“The capital market is a vital platform for national development and scattered, insignificant capital throughout the country cannot make a big push for the economy. Therefore, we need to pull them together, and the stock market is the ideal platform for the market’s functioning. The public duty is to channel savings into productive investments that would enable us to achieve the target, Dr Fernando said recently at the launching of the Securities and Exchange Commission of Sri Lanka’s (SEC) comprehensive strategic roadmap aimed at transforming the nation’s capital market into a resilient, innovative and globally competitive hub.

Themed ‘12 Pillars One Vision for a Resilient Market’, the plan outlined a series of transformative projects designed to revitalise the economy, enhance investor confidence, and mobilise capital for long-term development.

Fernando urged regulators and industry players to lower entry barriers and attract grassroots savers, arguing that broader participation is key to boosting liquidity and efficiency. “If you really want robust capital formation and exponential growth, we need to bring them together to the capital market and close the gaps, the minister said.

SEC’s roadmap is structured around twelve key projects that address market infrastructure, product diversity, regulatory frameworks and investor engagement. The ambitious reform agenda is built to deliver three core outcomes over the next decade. “Over the next decade our strategy will be driven by twelve key developmental and regulatory priorities, Fernando said.

“Our ultimate goal is to build a dynamic and resilient market that fosters long term stability, ensuring sustainable prosperity for generations to come, SEC chairman Prof. Hareendra Dissabandara said at the launch.

He noted that the aim is to foster continuous innovation in the capital market to ensure its relevance and responsiveness to the evolving needs of the economy and investors; enhance infrastructure and services to be more efficient, accessible and reliable; and to develop a diverse market ecosystem that strengthens the competitiveness and resilience of overall capital market.

Secretary to the Ministry of Finance Dr. Harshana Suriyapperuma said that improved governance has contributed to stability, which had paved the way to achieve five percent GDP growth this year.

“Transformation effect created stability in the country which began the journey of heading to economic growth and this twelve pillar programme would be an impetus to that target, Suriapperuma said.

Key structural reforms include the demutualisation of the CSE, which will transition it from a member-owned entity to a company limited by shares to enhance governance and efficiency. Another cornerstone is the implementation of a Central Counterparty (CCP) mechanism, which went live in August 2025, to guarantee trade settlements and reduce counterparty risk, thereby strengthening market stability.

Mahindra Ideal Finance strengthens Central Province reach with new branch in Gampola

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.