TBS International: Spotlighting Sri Lankan excellence to impact global industry standards

This year’s Techtextil and Texprocess in Frankfurt, Germany, marked the 3rd consecutive year in which TBS International represented Sri Lankan excellence in the global arena. During this 4-day exhibition, they were able to showcase their commitment in the global textile landscape.

TBS’s stall aimed to impress not only with their cutting-edge products and expertise in textiles but also with Sri Lanka’s signature hospitality and cultural heritage. Each visitor left the stall with the warm aftertaste of pure Ceylon tea and a souvenir to remember the occasion with a favourable impression of Sri Lanka in their hearts.

Their accomplishments found keen ears at the exhibition and highlighted Sri Lanka as a force to be reckoned with in the future of textiles. What sets them apart is their ability to customise and consistently tailor the products as per client’s need. From specialised yarns for industrial applications to fashion-forward textiles, TBS portfolio reflects their dedication to quality and customer satisfaction.

TBS employ a robust research and development process that doesn’t just focus on technology but leverages on creativity and collaboration to develop ground-breaking products. They make sure that every thread tells a story of ingenuity and craftsmanship, delivering bespoken solutions that address the specific needs of clients. Whether it’s enhancing performance, improving sustainability, or elevating aesthetics, the team is always ready to turn ideas into reality in a way that truly makes an impact for their clients.

TBS International is at the forefront of eco-friendly innovation, developing sustainable products and practices that minimise their environmental footprint while elevating quality and performance. From recycled materials to biodegradable fibres, TBS’s sustainable solutions are reshaping the future of textiles.

At this prestigious event they showcased the best that Sri Lanka has to offer in terms of products that push boundaries. By showcasing their expertise in consistently delivering sustainable solutions to diverse needs, they hope to positively impact the global textile landscape and make eco-friendly solutions the norm in the industry.