Corruption by causing a ‘loss to the government’

When Sri Lanka gained Independence, the only anti-corruption legislation in force consisted of Sections 158, 159 and 160 of Chapter IX of the Penal Code, which dealt with public servants accepting or soliciting gratification for doing or forbearing to do any official act, or showing favour to any person, etc. Since these provisions were considered inadequate, the Bribery Act was promulgated in 1954. An amendment to the Bribery Act (No. 40) of 1958 created the office of the Bribery Commissioner.

The accumulation of unexplained wealth was also brought within the ambit of the Bribery Act. Where a person holding public office acquired property or money which could not have been part of his known income or receipts, the presumption was that such money and property had been acquired through the proceeds of bribery. Until 1994, once the Bribery Commissioner’s Department investigated an allegation of bribery against any person and was satisfied that there was a prima facie case, the matter would have to be referred to the Attorney General for prosecution.

In 1994, the new government that came into power introduced the Commission to Investigate Allegations of Bribery or Corruption Act No. 19, of 1994, which created a Commission that could investigate allegations of bribery or corruption and also institute prosecutions without having to refer the matter to the Attorney General’s Department. The government of 1994 also brought an amendment (Act, No. 20 of 1994), which introduced a new Section 70 to the Bribery Act which made ‘causing a loss to the government’ an offence amounting to corruption, even if there is no evidence of bribe taking or unlawful enrichment by the person concerned.

From the time this Section 70 was enacted in 1994, it attracted the attention of legal experts even before any prosecutions had been instituted under its provisions. In 1999, President’s Counsel (later Justice) Saleem Marsoof writing to the journal of Financial Crime raised questions about the impact Section 70 of the Bribery Act would have on the exercise of the discretionary power held by public servants. Taking the example of the power granted to the Collector of Customs under the Customs Ordinance to reduce the duty imposed on an excisable article if he was of the opinion that the duty was excessive, Justice Marsoof asked whether the exercise of that discretionary power could lead to prosecution under Section 70.

Indeed, the wording of Section 70 left public servants seriously exposed. Section 70 referred to a ‘wrongful’ or ‘unlawful’ loss to the government which implied that some losses to the government could be lawful and correct. However, there was no way proposed to distinguish one from the other. The problem with Section 70 was that it sought to place in a straitjacket an aspect of public administration and governance which could not be dealt with in that manner.

It was after the Yahapalana government came into power, in 2015, that Section 70 of the Bribery Act really came into its own. In January 2018, the Yahapalana cabinet decided to amend Section 70 so as to empower the Commission to Investigate Allegations of Bribery or Corruption to institute prosecutions under Section 70 not only in the Magistrate’s Courts but in the High Courts as well. An amendment to the Bribery Act (No. 22 of 2018) was passed by the Yahapalana government for this purpose.

At the height of this Section 70 prosecutions blitz under the  Yahapalana government, another legal heavyweight President’s Counsel M. M. Zuhair wrote to The Island about a case, where Section 70 had been applied to a former Attorney General (no less!). He wrote:

“…Opinions and decisions are required to be taken regularly by the Executive, headed by the President, by Ministers, by the Cabinet and by the Courts. These decisions are often taken both with and without reference to any person benefiting from such decisions.

“To interpret or allege such decisions as wrongful or unlawful particularly after the holders of such office had ceased to hold the office… could become a common occurrence that could lead to abuse of section 70 for personal or political purposes. Public servants would be unwilling to take decisions and governance could ground to a virtual halt, adversely affecting the people …”

Under Section 70, government officials, whether it be the Director General of the Customs Department, the Attorney General or arguably even members of the judiciary, were exposed to the possibility of prosecution. The Bribery Act of 1954 was repealed by the Anti-Corruption Act, No. 9 of 2023, but the old Section 70 continues to exist in the Anti-Corruption Act of 2023 in the form of Section 111. Hence this issue is still very much alive. What makes things worse is that Section 161 of the Anti-Corruption Act of 2023 says that  “Where the provisions of this Act are in conflict or are inconsistent with any other written law, the provisions of this Act shall prevail.”

Undoubtedly, public servants have infinite opportunities to accept bribes or to show favour to selected parties. However, this discretionary power has been granted to public servants to facilitate the smooth functioning of the government. Without such discretionary power, governance will become impossible. Obviously, some middle ground will have to be found or we may see the entire country grinding to a halt. Bribery and corruption are issues that afflict all of mankind. Our neighbour India appears to have a workable system in place to deal with such issues without paralysing the entire system of governance.

According to the Indian Prevention of Corruption Act of 1988, the authority that investigates allegations of bribery or corruption is the police. Only police officers, above a certain rank, can investigate any offence related to bribery and corruption without the order of a Magistrate or make arrests without a warrant. Under Section 19 of the Indian Prevention of Corruption Act, no bribery or corruption prosecution can be instituted in a court of law against a public servant without the sanction of the Indian central government or a state government as the case may be.

According to Section 17A of the Indian Prevention of Corruption Act when it comes to the investigation of offences relating to recommendations made or decisions taken by public servants in the discharge of their official functions or duties, no police officer can even conduct an inquiry into such matters without the prior approval of the Indian central government, or a state government as the case may be.

The Indian Central Vigilance Commission Act was passed in 2003 to establish a Central Vigilance Commission (CVC) to inquire into offences under the Prevention of Corruption Act of 1988 committed by certain categories of public servants of the Central Government.

In conducting such inquiries, the Indian Central Vigilance Commission can among other things, issue summons, examine any person under oath; require the production of any document; requisition any public record from any court or office etc.

However, under Section 8(1)(c) of the Act of 2003 the Central Vigilance Commission cannot even begin such an inquiry unless a reference has been made by the Central Government requesting the Commission to do so. Under Section 26 of the Central Vigilance Commission Act of 2003 the police cannot conduct any inquiry into any offence under the Prevention of Corruption Act of 1988 alleged to have been committed by certain categories of employees without the prior approval of the Central Government.

The Indian anti-corruption laws have provisions to prosecute wrongdoers for actually taking bribes or for possessing unexplained wealth. The above -mentioned safeguards have been put in place to shield public servants who make bona fide decisions in the discharge of their duties. India has an institutionally strong public service which will not necessarily get swept off their feet by temporary political waves. There is a much stronger institutional consciousness within the Indian public service than in the public service in Sri Lanka.

Indeed, even the Indian political establishment behaves very differently to that of Sri Lanka when it comes to safeguarding the sovereignty and the national interest of that country. In 2010, when a Congress Party government moved to toughen the Indian Foreign Contributions Regulatory Act, the Parliamentary Committee that examined the reforms was headed by the BJP Leader of the Opposition Sushma Swaraj. Due to such conditions that prevail in India, the safeguards for public servants provided for in the Indian Prevention of Corruption Act of 1988 and the Central Vigilance Commission Act of 2003 would suffice to shield public servants from unfair inquisitions, arrest and prosecution and to keep the business of government running smoothly.

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.