Sri Lanka grants preliminary approval for Starlink: State Minister

ECONOMYNEXT – Sri Lanka’s Telecommunications Regulatory Commission (TRCSL) has granted preliminary approval for Starlink to provide satellite-based internet services  in the island, following a formal public consultation process.

“It’s my pleasure to announce that TRCSL has granted preliminary approval for Starlink to provide satellite-based internet services following a formal public consultation process,” State Technology Minister Kanaka Herath said on social media platform X (twitter).

The details of the public consultation will be published tomorrow, Herath said.

“Starting today, we are collaborating with Starlink to provide internet facilities via satellite technology, marking a significant transformation in the technology sector. Unlike the limited internet facilities provided by towers, this satellite-based technology allows for internet connectivity from virtually anywhere.”

The internet facility would offer benefits to education, research, tourism, agricultural and fisheries sectors by delivering a fast internet service, Herath said.

“Under Section 22 of the Telecommunications Act, internet services will be provided via satellite technology. President Ranil Wickremesinghe has instructed that a relief package be made available to school children, fishermen, and researchers to ensure they can access this internet service. Plans for implementing this relief package are currently being prepared.”

Starlink is not yet established as a telephone network company in Sri Lanka.

However, the TRC has approved it under Sections 17 and 22 of the Telecommunications Regulatory Act, granting it a frequency license, its Director General Madusanka Dissanayake said, adding that the Act will be amended to issue a Telecommunication Service provider license.

“The initial setup or the registration cost for this service ranges between US$ 400 and US$ 600, with a monthly fee of US$ 99. The satellite technology allows for internet access anywhere in the world and offers speeds several times faster than the existing fibre technology in Sri Lanka. This will significantly enhance the technology sector in the country.”

Wickremesinghe discussed connecting the island to the Starlink satellite system with its founder Elon Musk, when the two met on the sidelines of the World Water Forum in Indonesia.

Starlink is a low earth orbit satellite network, connected to Musk’s SpaceX group.

The network connects around 3 million people with high-speed internet across nearly 100 countries, territories and other markets. (Colombo/Jun6/2024)