Commonwealth Union advocates for Appé Lanka’s grassroots efforts in Sri Lanka

Appé Lanka Founder Shaan Corea (left) with Commonwealth Union President and Presidential Envoy of Sri Lanka (2022-2024) Nirj Deva

Commonwealth Union Ltd., has announced its partnership with the Appé Lanka Foundation, a rural development initiative focused on transforming the Poonakary region in Northern Sri Lanka.

For the past eight years, Appé Lanka has made significant strides in improving local livelihoods and infrastructure, driven by a commitment to sustainability, empowerment, and unity. This partnership is a testament to Commonwealth Union’s dedication to Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR), supporting social impact without any financial gain. The goal is simple — to make a lasting, positive difference in these communities.

Appé Lanka’s journey began when its founder, Shaan Corea, visited Poonakary and witnessed the daily struggles of its people — women walking miles to fetch water, farmers battling dry lands, and a community recovering from decades of conflict. The foundation’s first initiative addressed the region’s water crisis, installing Reverse Osmosis (RO) plants to provide clean, safe drinking water.

The foundation’s holistic approach — addressing water security, education, food security nutrition, and reconciliation, demonstrates the power of collaboration in transforming underprivileged communities. From installing water purification plants to organising sports and arts events for children, Appé Lanka’s work is an inspiring example of the profound impact that compassionate, grassroots initiatives can have on regional development.

Appé Lanka, is a development project focused on empowering divisions in Northern Sri Lanka, starting with Poonakary, a region heavily impacted by a 30-year war. The project targets sustainable initiatives such as providing renewable energy through solar systems, benefiting 28 homes so far, with plans for 1,000 more.

Appé Lanka also addresses transportation, having distributed bicycles to school children to prevent dropouts and increase attendance. In promoting peace and reconciliation, the project has conducted various workshops, such as ‘Music for Unity,’ ‘Arts for Unity,’ and ‘Sports for Unity,’ and has organized exchange programs in both Poonakary and Colombo. Each year, students in the region are also given a year's supply of exercise books to further their education and discourage absenteeism. Additionally, Appé Lanka focuses on livelihood development, to create sustainable employment for women and women-headed households. To tackle water shortages, 30 schools now have water purifying systems, with more installations planned.