The Vijay factor

Pity the land that needs heroes, Brecht has famously said. Some countries have gone to the extent of elevating political greenhorns to positions of power, expecting them to play messianic roles, simply because of their popularity in the tinsel world and adeptness at uttering Goebbelsian lies and making Machiavellian promises.

Tamil Nadu voted overwhelmingly for Vijay (Joseph Vijay) recently. However, his party, the Tamilaga Vettri Kazhagam (TVK) could not secure an outright majority, and his political journey has had a bumpy start. He has been left with no alternative but to resort to political horse trading to form a coalition government. The Congress has reportedly made overtures to the TVK, and a political marriage of convenience is said to be likely.

The problem with most actors-turned-politicians in this region is that they tend to consider real world politics as a mere extension of their celluloid reality, and, worse, act accordingly. True, there are some exceptions, but they only prove the rule.

We could have ignored Vijay’s theatrics and campaign slogans, and considered them problems confined to Tamil Nadu, if not for their implications for Sri Lanka. Vijay obviously lacks experience to navigate complex political and economic issues. Tamil Nadu actors’ stunts in films defy the laws of physics and are hugely entertaining, but they are of no use in the real world vis-à-vis economic and political challenges. Among Vijay’s campaign promises that helped him garner enough popular support to win the recent election are a 2,500-rupee monthly allowance for women heads of households, six free cylinders of LPG a year for families, one sovereign gold ring each for all newborns, a 15,000-rupee education assistance allowance for mothers of schoolchildren, a 4,000-rupee monthly allowance for unemployed graduates, Rs. 5 lakh as new start-up loans, and Rs 25 lakh for biz launch loans. These promises, if ever implemented, will cost Tamil Nadu more than 50% of its annual tax revenue, according to Indian media reports. So, all signs are that most of them will go unfulfilled, and Vijay and TVK will have their work cut out to retain popular support. Trouble for Sri Lanka is bound to begin when they struggle to shore up their approval ratings.

Sri Lanka is the last resort of all failed Tamil Nadu politicians, as it were. Vijay has already called for ‘retrieving’ Katchatheevu. He is emulating his predecessors. He is likely to intensify his Katchatheevu campaign and flog the fishermen’s issue harder when the going gets tough for him so as to divert public attention from burning problems. The BJP will do everything in its power to undermine the TVK and recover lost ground in Tamil Nadu, but Vijay’s interests and those of the BJP overlap where Katchatheevu, the delayed Provincial Council elections, devolution, ethnic issues in Sri Lanka, and illegal fishing are concerned.

The JVP’s India policy has undergone a sea change over the years. Unlike in the past, when it dismissed India’s concerns about Sri Lankan issues as intentions of domination, the JVP is today subservient to India. The JVP-led government will therefore have to address the issues raised by the BJP and the TVK, devolution being prominent among them.

The JVP made short work of one Vijay in the late 1980s, as it considered him an obstacle in its path.It gunned down Vijaya (or Wijaya) Kumaratunga, popularly known as Vijay, because he led the political forces supportive of devolution and the Provincial Council system. About 38 years on, it has another Vijay to contend with, albeit in India, and the issues which it sought to resolve by killing Vijay have not gone away. The JVP-led government is under Indian pressure to implement the 13th Amendment fully and hold the much-delayed PC polls.

There have been various analyses of Vijay’s victory in Tamil Nadu and its implications for Sri Lanka. Some analysts have stressed the need for the JVP-NPP government to view challenges arising from the rise of the TVK as opportunities and strategise to enlist the support of Tamil Nadu as a development partner. This no doubt should be on Sri Lanka’s agenda. However, prudence demands that while being cautiously optimistic, Sri Lanka remain mindful of the possibility of having to deal with a more hostile Tamil Nadu under Vijay’s leadership and find ways and means of dealing with such an eventuality.

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.