CMA Sri Lanka’s National Management Accounting Conference kicks off tomorrow

Key experts to share insights to “Navigating Stability towards Dynamic Growth”

The Institute of Certified Management Accountants of Sri Lanka (CMA) will be holding its 20th annual flagship event, the CMA National Management Accounting Conference 2024, on the theme ‘Navigating Stability towards Dynamic Growth’ from 24 and 25 July at the Shangri-La Colombo.

CMA Sri Lanka, established in 1999 and inaugurated in June 2000, was incorporated by Act of Parliament No. 23 of 2009 as the National Professional Management Accounting Institution in Sri Lanka.

The conference theme, ‘Navigating Stability towards Dynamic Growth,’ reflects their collective pursuit of excellence in management accounting practices to achieve near-term priorities, recover from the economic crisis, and restore economic stability and debt sustainability. In the medium term, the country will need to address the structural weaknesses that led to the economic crisis and build a strong foundation for robust and inclusive growth.

In line with the above, this year’s CMA National Management Accounting Conference will focus mainly on sustaining reform momentum for a strong recovery, navigating ESG dynamics and economic recovery, managing costs for dynamic growth, innovating the role of management accountants, navigating the new frontiers in digital transformation, and enhancing fiscal consolidation and macroeconomics. The conference will also concentrate on weak public financial management (PFM), poor performance of state-owned enterprises (SOEs), a regulatory environment that restricts private sector participation (PSP), systemic and severe governance challenges, a weak investment and trade climate, economic opportunities, ESG reporting, and nature-positive economic recovery and growth.

The conference will be inaugurated by the Chief Guest, Central Bank of Sri Lanka Governor Dr. P. Nandalal Weerasinghe who will deliver an address on ‘Navigating Stability towards Dynamic Growth’. CMA Sri Lanka Founder/President and CMA National Management Accounting Conference 2024 Chairman Prof. Lakshman R. Watawala will welcome the distinguished gathering, followed by addresses by South Asian Federation of Accountants (SAFA) President and CA Sri Lanka President Heshana Kuruppu. The keynote address on ‘Taxation Policy and Practice for Navigating Economic Stability towards Dynamic Growth’ will be delivered by John Curtin Distinguished Professor and CPA Australia President and Chair of the Board Prof. Dale Pinto FCPA. The inaugural session will conclude with closing remarks by CMA Vice President and Technical Committee Chairman Hennayake Bandara, and the other technical sessions will follow.

The conference will have an inaugural session, Four Technical Sessions on the themes Sustaining reform Momentum for a Strong Recovery: Navigating ESG Dynamics and Economic Recovery: Managing Costs for dynamic Growth: Shaping the Future – Trends and insights for Tomorrow  and the final panel discussion IMF Reform Program Navigating Stability towards Dynamic Growth – Political, Economic and Social Implications.

Those who wish to attend the conference are requested to send an e-mail to: [email protected].