Lithuania, Sri Lanka sign MoU to mark 30 years of diplomatic relations

Sri Lanka and Lithuania signed a Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) to enhance political cooperation during the first-ever high-level visit by a Lithuanian state delegation to Sri Lanka, held to mark 30 years of diplomatic relations between the two countries.

A three-day visit by Lithuanian Vice-Minister of Foreign Affairs Vidmantas Verbickas from October 4 to 6 paved the way for strengthening bilateral relations in political consultations and digital cooperation.

In a statement, the Consulate of the Republic of Lithuania in Sri Lanka said the visit, held to mark the 30th anniversary of diplomatic relations between the two countries, established a framework for regular dialogue and opened opportunities for cooperation in technology, education, trade and professional exchanges.

At the invitation of Deputy Minister of Foreign Affairs and Foreign Employment Arun Hemachandra, Vice-Minister Verbickas, accompanied by Ambassador of Lithuania to Sri Lanka Diana Mickevičienė, held inaugural political consultations at the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Foreign Employment and Tourism.

The discussions covered bilateral political relations, domestic and regional developments, trade and investment, tourism, and cooperation in multilateral forums, including the United Nations and candidatures.

The delegation also met Deputy Minister of Digital Economy Eranga Weeraratne and explored cooperation in digitalisation, GovTech, digital public services and artificial intelligence.

Lithuania expressed its readiness to share its experience in developing secure, innovative and people-centred digital solutions.

The delegation also engaged with the University of Colombo, where Vice-Minister Verbickas met Vice Chancellor Professor Indika Mahesh Karunathilake and delivered a lecture on Lithuania’s foreign and security policy in a changing geopolitical context.

The delegation also visited the Consulate of Lithuania in Colombo, where they met Honorary Consul R. M. Manivannan and Director – Consular, Diplomatic, Political Affairs, PR and Communications Kanchana Kodituwakku, along with the consulate team.

The delegation expressed appreciation for the consulate’s support in strengthening ties between the two countries.