JXG Management Trainee programme shapes the next generation of future leaders

JXG (Janashakthi Group), a leading Sri Lankan financial conglomerate, recently welcomed the second cohort of high-potential talent to the JXG Management Trainee Programme, themed “Spartans”, a strategic initiative designed to nurture and empower the next generation of leaders within the Group.

Developed to identify and cultivate individuals with strong leadership potential, the second edition of Spartans offers a comprehensive blend of orientation, skill development, and hands-on learning experiences aimed at accelerating professional growth. The programme integrates key business fundamentals, cross-functional operations, customer-centric thinking, leadership behaviours, and strategic business priorities, equipping trainees with the capabilities required to thrive in a dynamic corporate environment.

Building on the success of its inaugural edition, Spartans II delivers an immersive 18-month cross-functional learning journey across the entire JXG ecosystem. Trainees gain exposure to the Group’s core business sectors including Insurance, Non-Banking Financial Institutions (NBFI), and Investments, while also engaging closely with key corporate functions such as Human Resources, Legal, Marketing, Finance, Administration, and Information Technology. This holistic structure is designed to broaden perspectives, strengthen technical and interpersonal competencies, and develop adaptable, well-rounded future leaders.

Commenting on the programme and the induction of its new cohort, Wasanthi Stephen, Group Chief Human Resources Officer at JXG, stated, “At JXG, we believe leadership emerges at the intersection of skill, integrity, and purpose-driven innovation. The JXG Management Trainee Programme -Spartans, identifies exceptional individuals with the potential to transform talent into impact, while cultivating the resilience, adaptability, and purpose-driven mindset that define strong leadership.”

The newest cohort of Spartans II continues JXG’s commitment to transforming promising young talent into future-ready leaders. By providing access to industry expertise, technical excellence, and meaningful leadership exposure, the programme empowers trainees not only to contribute to JXG’s continued growth, but also to play an active role in shaping the country’s economic progress and future.

JXG (Janashakthi Group) is a Sri Lankan financial conglomerate, with a presence spanning in the insurance, finance & leasing, and investment banking verticals. Each of the Group’s core businesses is a formidable player in its industry. JXG comprises First Capital Holdings PLC, Janashakthi Insurance PLC, Janashakthi Finance PLC and its philanthropic arm, the Janashakthi Foundation.

Bourse indices dip as West Asian tensions continue to simmer

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.