Business Excellence Masterclass in Colombo with Harvard Professor Boris Groysberg in March

Breakthrough initiative via collaboration between COYLE, Harvard Club of Sri Lanka and Sampath Bank

In a landmark collaboration, the Chamber of Young Lankan Entrepreneurs (COYLE), the Harvard Club of Sri Lanka and Sampath Bank are poised to elevate corporate leadership in Sri Lanka with an exclusive 3-day Business Excellence Masterclass featuring Harvard Professor Boris Groysberg, a luminary in organisational leadership.

This program will be conducted in the style of an authentic Harvard lecture, providing a unique opportunity for participants.

The event, scheduled from 4 to 6 March, at the Shangri La Hotel in Colombo, brings together COYLE’s commitment to empowering young entrepreneurs, the Harvard Club of Sri Lanka’s dedication to academic and career excellence, and Sampath Bank’s unwavering support for professional and personal development.

Professor Boris Groysberg, a distinguished member of the faculty at Harvard Business School, globally renowned for his expertise, will lead this exclusive masterclass. His insights, encompassing the latest in organisational leadership, promise to reshape the corporate landscape in Sri Lanka.

The significance of Professor Groysberg’s presence cannot be overstated. With a background in business and organisational leadership, he has received several notable accolades and has built an unparalleled understanding of organisational dynamics. His valuable and unique contributions are poised to uplift corporate leadership in Sri Lanka, especially in the context of the present economic climate.

Aiming to set a new standard for corporate leadership in the country, this masterclass will provide participants with a unique opportunity to gain practical skills and knowledge that will have a lasting positive impact on them both personally and professionally. This initiative thus underscores a shared commitment by COYLE and the Harvard Club of Sri Lanka, to fostering leadership excellence in the region. The Harvard Club of Sri Lanka’s instrumental role in bringing Professor Groysberg to Sri Lanka highlights its dedication to providing unique opportunities for professional growth.

Sampath Bank’s support of this exclusive event solidifies its commitment to supporting initiatives that contribute to the professional development and growth of the business community in Sri Lanka. Firmly expressing the bank’s support of such initiatives, Sampath Bank representative said: “The presence of such a respected academic as Professor Groysberg from the Harvard Business School in Sri Lanka is truly a unique opportunity. Furthermore, it will be an enlightening experience for all participants to be a part of a Harvard-style business masterclass. We are incredibly proud to support this initiative that aligns with our goal of nurturing leadership and innovation in the Sri Lankan business landscape.” In this exclusive 3-day Business Excellence Masterclass with Professor Groysberg, participants will explore transformative case studies, including Domino’s Pizza and Amazon’s evolution. Interactive lectures will cover leadership in extreme situations, decision-making for leaders, and dynamics in recruiting star performers. The masterclass will spotlight Danaher Corporation’s corporate strategy and strategies for engaging, inspiring, and retaining employees. This diverse agenda ensures a rich learning experience, providing practical tools and knowledge to enhance participants’ leadership capabilities.

All participants who successfully complete the masterclass will receive a certificate signed by Professor Groysberg. Participants will also enjoy lunch, and morning and evening snacks at Shangri-La Colombo as part of the package.

For inquiries and to reserve your spots, please contact Sheruni Alles on +94 777 881 923 or email [email protected], or Indunil Ukwatte on +94 778 047 172 or email [email protected].