Sri Lanka’s BRICS membership not rejected, FM, Russian Embassy clarify

ECONOMYNEXT – Sri Lanka’s application for membership in BRICS has not been rejected, but not accepted due to the decision by nine members in the block, the island nation’s Foreign Ministry said.

Cabinet Spokesman Vijitha Herath last week said Sri Lanka’s application to become a member in the BRICS has not been accepted by the group’s current membership, but its request to become a member of BRICS’ New Development Bank (NDB) has been accepted.

“Not accepted means our application was not rejected,” a Foreign Ministry official said.

“Our application is in the process. We do not have to apply again for the membership.”

Sri Lanka applied for the membership of BRICS when its delegation led by Foreign Secretary Aruni Wijewardena took part in the BRICS summit last month held in Russia.

BRICS, an economic and political group, has been gaining increasing relevance in recent years.

It poses several potential challenges to the global dominance of the United States and the central role of the U.S. dollar in international trade and finance.

Cabinet Spokesman Herath said nine countries which are holding membership in BRICS have decided not to entertain any new membership this time.

“We applied for membership only close to the October summit. We also spoke to foreign ministers of many countries to back us. Those countries also backed us. But when the summit decided not to expand membership, we won’t get that opportunity,” he said.

“But we applied to get the membership of the NDB Bank which comes under BRICS. We have got an opportunity to implement that. It should be decided by the Sri Lanka government. We will be deciding at the Cabinet in the future,” Herath said.

The Foreign Ministry in a statement also said the Foreign Secretary Aruni Wijewardane, as leader of the Sri Lanka delegation announced Sri Lanka’s interest.

“At the Summit, the BRICS Member States also endorsed a new category of Partner Countries, whilst ‘welcoming the considerable interest by countries of the Global South in BRICS’ (Kazan Declaration),” the Ministry said in the statement.

“Pending requests for BRICS membership from many countries including Sri Lanka will be considered by BRICS member countries in due course.”

“Sri Lanka’s intention to join the New Development Bank was welcomed by the President of the New Development Bank. The Foreign Ministry together with relevant Government agencies will review the procedures and timing in this regard.”

“There is no truth in the statement carried in certain local media that “Sri Lanka’s BRICS application has been rejected”.”

The Russian Embassy in Colombo in a statement also said Sri Lanka’s application will be considered by BRICS in due course.

“The Embassy would like to highlight that Sri Lanka has applied to join BRICS. The Russian BRICS Chairship welcomed Sri Lanka’s interest,” the Russian Embassy said in a statement.

“Its application will be considered by BRICS in due course in full consultation and consensus along with bids of numerous other countries who have also applied. The local media reports that Sri Lanka’s application has been rejected are wrong.” (Colombo/November 10/2024)