U.S. Under Secretary Liz Allen arrives in Sri Lanka

The U.S. Under Secretary of State for Public Diplomacy, Elizabeth M. Allen has arrived in Sri Lanka for an official visit.

Upon her arrival, the Under Secretary was cordially welcomed by the U.S. Ambassador in Colombo, Julie Chung. “Pleased to welcome @UnderSecPD Liz Allen, the first visit from an U.S. Under Secretary for Public Diplomacy to Sri Lanka,” the envoy said in a post on her X handle (formerly Twitter).

During her stay here, Allen will meet with government officials, media representatives, digital content creators and youth leaders to discuss the partnership between the two nations and the safeguarding of Sri Lanka’s information and media space, and to explore ways to work together to promote prosperity on the island nation, Chung said further.

Following her Sri Lanka tour, Allen will embark on a visit to India.

Meanwhile, U.S. Deputy Secretary of State for Management and Resources Richard R. Verma is also slated to travel to the island nation.

According to the US State Department, the Deputy Secretary’s meetings with senior officials in Colombo will support U.S.-Sri Lankan defense and maritime security cooperation, the statement read further.

Verma will visit the Colombo Port’s West Container Terminal, where the U.S. is supporting Sri Lanka’s ongoing economic recovery through USD 553 million in financing to transform Colombo into a regional shipping hub.

Subsequently, he will meet with civil society leaders to hear their perspective on democratic governance in Sri Lanka and with government officials to voice U.S. support for the protection of free speech and open discourse.

Prior to his Sri Lanka visit, Verma will travel to India and the Maldives to discuss full range of issues including economic cooperation, security, and technology.

In a statement, the State Department said these visits underscore the United States’ unwavering commitment to reinforcing and expanding partnerships and alliances.