Bogawantalawa Tea Estates commemorates World Environment Week 2026

Bogawantalawa Tea Estates PLC, the world’s first Climate Positive Tea Company, commemorated World Environment Week 2026 through a comprehensive environmental conservation and climate action campaign that brought together government institutions, schools, estate communities, employees, and environmental stakeholders in a collective effort to strengthen biodiversity conservation, ecosystem restoration, and climate resilience, throughout the country.

Aligned with the global theme ‘Inspired by Nature for Climate and Our Future’ and Sri Lanka’s national theme ‘Urgent Climate Action’, the initiative was conducted from June 1-7, with the flagship celebration held on June 2 at The Center of Sustainability of Bogawantalawa Tea Estates PLC’s, Wanarajah Estate, Dickoya.

The climate action week featured environmental awareness and training programmes, competitions for school children, awarding scholarships for youngenvironmentalists, biodiversity conservation activities, waste and water management activities, enrichment of catchments and watershed areas,  andclean-up drives, in addition to ecosystem restoration projects, and large-scale native and fruit tree planting programmes. The programme further reinforced the Company’s commitment to producing premium tea through environmentally responsible practices while protecting natural ecosystems and creating long-term environmental value.

Throughout the week, more than 12 different initiatives were carried out across the Company’s estates, featuring community engagement activities designed to promote environmental stewardship, responsible waste management, and climate-conscious practices among employees, students, and local communities. These efforts extended to 43 locations within the Company’s managed areas, including schools, government offices, temples, and other public spaces.

A key highlight of the campaign was the distribution and planting of approximately 15,000 native and fruit-bearing plants across Bogawantalawa’s estates.

Lalith Munasinghe, Executive Director, Bogawantalawa Tea Estates PLC said, “Throughits World Environment Week 2026 campaign, Bogawantalawa Tea Estates PLC reaffirmed its position as a global sustainability leader. As the world’s first Climate Positive Tea Company, Bogawantalawa continues to demonstrate that meaningful environmental progress is achieved through collective action, driving climate resilience, biodiversity conservation, ecosystem restoration, and responsible environmental stewardship to create a greener, healthier, and more sustainable future for generations to come.

Dr. Thusitha Bandara, Director – Low Country Operations, Sustainability, Research & Development added, “At Bogawantalawa Tea Estates PLC, we firmly believe that environmental sustainability is not merely a corporate responsibility but a strategic investment in the future. As climate-related challenges continue to intensify globally, we remain committed to working together with our employees, communities, stakeholders, and future generations to protect natural resources, strengthen biodiversity, build climate resilience, and create a greener, healthier, and more sustainable future for Sri Lanka and the world.