DIMO and SDF boost farmers’ access to modern agriculture machinery

DIMO has recently partnered with Sarvodaya Development Finance (SDF) to provide accessibility to high-quality agricultural equipment for small and medium-scale farmers. The objective of this partnership is to elevate the agriculture industry’s mechanization to further develop efficiency and productivity.

Through this agreement, Sarvodaya Development Finance will provide special financing options for the STIHL Tea Pruner and Tiller Machines. DIMO Represents the STIHL high-quality power tool range backed by German Technology in Sri Lanka.

Rakhita Gunasekera, COO of the Retail Arm at DIMO, commented, “We are delighted to partner with Sarvodaya Development Finance to introduce modern agricultural equipment to a wider base of farmers. This collaboration aligns with our commitment to supporting the growth of Sri Lanka’s agriculture sector through innovative solutions.”

The STIHL Tea Pruner Machine is designed specifically for tea plantations and is used to trim tea bushes after the harvest, and the STIHL Tiller Machine can be used for several kinds of cultivation, such as vegetable gardens, paddy fields, and row crops. The tiller machine makes even the most challenging and labor-intensive groundwork simple, making it the ideal machine for small to medium-scale farmers and mixed-crop farmers.

There aren’t many vibrations when the worm gear drive is in use and the well-designed curved handlebar can be effortlessly adjusted to the individual body height for easy access to the tiller controls. With the assistance of one reverse gear, two forward gears, and intelligent weight distribution, farmers can operate the strong machine with less effort. Thanks to its operating width of 100 cm the tiller machine can effectively cultivate large areas of fields, plots, and plantations. Both machines have cutting-edge technologies installed to guarantee dependable and effective operation.

Indian HC brings up hot topics to the attention of SL authorities

Drop in tea and rubber production, coconut cultivations put on a brave face

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.