Back to Paradise

Fewer things are more impossible than a 45-minute layover at Doha International Airport. Disembarking takes a good 15 minutes, while the gates close 20 minutes before the next departure.

When you do the math, you realise you need to have exceptionally strong, sturdy legs to get to your next terminal. And that’s without the burden of bulky bags and the fear of wondering what will happen if you miss your flight and you have to wait a couple of hours or even a day to go back home.

In my case, home lay around 3,000 miles away. Not as far as San Francisco is to Doha – a gruelling 14 plus hour flight that can exhaust anyone – but far enough to make you want to go there quicker.

I had not been homesick in the US – there had been enough and more programs and meetings, friends to meet and places to visit, that had kept me busy – but as I sat in San Francisco, I had felt the vaguest stirrings of wanting to go back, kick off my shoes, and just collapse on my bed.

As it turned out, I did not miss my flight. My baggage did, though – in Colombo I had to wait two and a half hours to see them in the next flight from Doha. Yet as I found myself being rushed to the plane by one official after another – at one point I lost all sanity and almost collapsed – I couldn’t resist but laugh and cry.

It’s difficult to explain homesickness to someone for whom travel has become a way of life, like many of my colleagues. How do Americans view travel? According to Pew, almost a quarter of them have never flown abroad. There are obvious reasons for this – apart from the cost, travel within the US takes up more time than it does in smaller countries. The US, after all, is a federation of 50 states – 48 in the mainland, two away – and each is different and unique in their own way.

In America, travel becomes an act of sweet surrender – as John Denver put it. But it also takes on the air of a ritual. Again, I quote Denver: “Bags packed and standing by the front door, taxi pulling up in the early morning hours, the sound of a door closing behind you, and the thought of leaving someone that you care for very much.”

In my country, on the other hand, travel is still a luxury, an expensive proposition for a vast majority. Those who are leaving the country in droves are doing so because they have no choice: Sri Lanka is in a right royal mess, and people have to find money to look after their loved ones.

You come across families and friends weeping, in sadness but also fear, at the Bandaranaike International Airport every day, waving goodbyes to people they may never see for months if not years. They aren’t being sentimental: they are just afraid of what might happen to the people they love. Quite different to what Denver said:

Of course, I barely had time to think back on any of this in my rush to get to the next terminal. Later, as I sat back and laughed in my seat – silently, but almost maniacally – I couldn’t help but think of the tens of hundreds of thousands who leave the country in search of greener pastures, who don’t know if they will or even can make it abroad, who have to adjust to harsher climes.

So yes, I wanted to go home. I knew I would miss the US – its streets, its food, its landscapes, but more than anything, my friends there, who I will not meet for at least another two years. But knowing I would not be back for so long only made me long for home even more.

Perhaps it’s not so ironic that I found solace for my homesickness in American travel and country music. Yet on my last leg to Colombo, John Denver seemed a little too clichéd. Then I remembered another song, from a far more distant past and memory.

Paul Robeson first sang these words in 1958, the year the US State Department returned his passport to him – it had voided it eight years earlier because of his political beliefs.

The moment he got it back, Robeson – one of the greatest Americans who ever lived, a Renaissance Man of his time – chose to leave for Europe.

Today, “Going Home” reads like a dirge. Yet it is laden with irony. What home is he talking about, where are all those “folks” who have gathered for him? Are they in America, where he was born – or in Africa, where his ancestors were? If so, does going home actually mean going away from where you are to where you belong?

As I lay back and reflected on Robeson, I decided to put off such questions for later. I was tired, happy, and a little sad. I was caught between two worlds, and was transiting from the one to the other. I knew where home was. I knew what home was. It was a cup of milk tea in the morning, unbearably hot afternoons, rainy evenings, and cold nights. And for the first time in my life, I was missing all four.

Uditha Devapriya is a regular commentator on history, art and culture, politics, and foreign policy who can be reached at udakdev1@gmail.com. Together with Uthpala Wijesuriya, he heads U & U, an informal art and culture research collective.

Will there be an October Surprise to sway the 2024 election?

Crisis in Sri Lanka-US relations, Janavegaya & Mrs. B separating politics from official work

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.