Stars to brighten up Special Forces’ scene

They did it for us when the going was tough and now, I would say, it’s our turn to rally round and support them, and I’m referring, of course, to the Sri Lanka Army Special Forces.

The bravery, skills and dedication of the Special Forces have contributed significantly in safeguarding our nation and, in doing so, they have made enormous contributions.

As we all know, many made the supreme sacrifice, while several others are wounded and partially disabled…now retired and unemployed.

The Special Forces Veterans’ Association (SFVA) was established for the welfare of these war veterans…to provide them with financial aid, health and medical support, assistance at funerals, scholarships to their children, etc.

Yohani: ‘Halmasse’ scene (above) and ‘Manike Mage Hithe’ at ‘Ballad of the Warriors’

To raise the necessary funds for this purpose, the SFVA is working on a charity concert, featuring some of the big names in the music scene here.

‘Ballad of the Warriors’ will be held on Saturday, 9th November, at the Bishop’s College Auditorium and will feature Yohani, Sohan, Judy, Clifford Richards, Umara, J-Pal and Kamal Addararachchi, with Sumedha Mirihana handling the evening’s proceedings as compere.

This would be the ideal opportunity of music lovers here to see Yohani live in action, right here, on stage.

According to reports coming my way, Yohani will be singing her super hit ‘Manike Mage Hithe,’ as well as another of her catchy songs  ‘Halmasse.’

‘Halmasse’, incidentally, was put together by Rajiv Sebastian – the lyrics, music and arrangement – and it has a kind of an infectious beat which is sure to get the audience swinging away.

Yohani will be doing four songs, ‘Manike Mage Hithe,’ ‘Halmasse’ and two English songs, I’m told.

The featured artistes at ‘Ballad of the Warriors’ will all be doing four songs each, backed by six professional musicians who are generally involved in studio recordings.

The Army Band, too, will be featured in a very special segment.

Tickets are being snapped up pretty fast as this concert is for a very worthy cause and featuring a stellar line-up of stars as well.

You can make your choice where tickets are concerned: Rs. 10,000 (50% sold), Rs. 7,500, Rs. 5,000, Rs. 3,000 (sold out) and Rs. 1,500 (balcony).

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.