Ocean Lanka opens MFB to boost synthetic fabric innovation, production

Ocean Lanka Ltd., a major weft knit fabric manufacturer in Sri Lanka, has opened a new Multifunctional Building (MFB) at its Biyagama Export Processing Zone (EPZ) premises to increase its innovative synthetic fabrics production output.

Synthetic fabrics currently make up 10–15% of Ocean Lanka’s production output, but the MFB will allow the company to greatly expand this share.

This development guarantees global competitiveness in the production of synthetic apparel while highlighting Ocean Lanka’s commitment to innovation, sustainability, and product diversification, the company said in a statement.

The MFB’s opening places Ocean Lanka as a model plant committed to developing the synthetic fabric industry and strengthens the company’s position in spearheading Sri Lanka’s shift to value-added textiles in order to satisfy the changing needs of the global demand in Intimate wear, active wear, and the fashion industry, the company said in a statement.

With synthetic fabrics driving fashion, athletic, and performance worlds, Ocean Lanka’s growth is a clear indication of its intention to increase in-house production of synthetic textiles and for vendors to lessen dependency on imported raw materials.

Ocean Lanka President Dr. Austin Au said: “The Multifunctional Building is an investment in Sri Lanka’s future as a regional hub for synthetic fabrics as well as in infrastructure.”

He added: “It demonstrates our commitment to excellence, sustainability, and innovation, guaranteeing that we can satisfy the rising demand for performance-driven textiles globally while generating long-term value for our partners, employees, and the nation.”

Ocean Lanka’s Development and Innovation Centre, a hub for cutting-edge research, product engineering, and sustainable textile solutions, is housed in the new building.

The centre’s state-of-the-art equipment allows for sophisticated raw material research and development for synthetic textiles that are performance-driven, as well as sublimation and digital printing capabilities to produce colourful, high-resolution, environmentally friendly designs.

Modern knitting, dyeing, finishing, and printing machines are also used to guarantee production precision, consistency, and durability.

The entire production facility is processed in accordance with ISO 14001 EMS, Oeko-Tex, and Bluesign standards, demonstrating the company’s strong emphasis on environmental responsibility and sustainable practices.

Functionality, safety, and innovation have all been carefully integrated into the four-story MFB’s design for the manufacturing of synthetic textiles from start to finish.

The Chemical Store, which has chemicals that have been authorised by Bluesign, and the Synthetic Brushing Area, which has a modern water-based brushing machine to give synthetic textiles a superior cotton-touch finish, are located on the ground floor.

A modern 10-chamber Stenter machine for finishing, an Oli Washing Range for fabric purity, and a sublimation printing section for polyester base fabrics are all located on the first floor.

High-performance Jet Dyeing Machines, brand-new Slitting Machines, and a dedicated office space are all located on the second floor.

The Development and Innovation Centre and the Digital Printing Unit, which combines an existing 16-head digital printing machine with a new 48-head machine to deliver colourful, photographic-quality prints with eco-friendly and effective procedures, are located on the third floor.

By providing innovative, sustainable, and high-quality textile solutions, Ocean Lanka further solidifies Sri Lanka’s standing as a regional leader in the manufacturing of synthetic fabrics and enhances the nation’s export competitiveness.

The MFB strengthens Ocean Lanka’s commitment to its employees, partners, and stakeholders while reassuring international buyers that Sri Lanka is prepared to deliver top-notch synthetic textiles on par with global hubs.

In addition to increasing Ocean Lanka’s capacity, the MFB is an investment in the long-term growth of the synthetic fabric business, to promote collaboration, creativity, and employee well-being.