India–Sri Lanka textile industries interact in Colombo

The India–Sri Lanka Textile Trade Forum was organised on the sidelines of the Intex Sri Lanka 2026 by Worldex India, with the support of the High Commission of India, on 6 August 2026 at BMICH, Colombo.

Intex, the region’s premier international textile sourcing exhibition, witnessed strong participation from India, with over 80 Indian exhibitors, Export Promotion Councils and industry bodies showcasing India’s capabilities across the textile value chain.

India’s participation at Intex Sri Lanka 2026 was anchored by the special “Incredible Textiles of India” Pavilion, supported by leading Export Promotion Councils under the Ministry of Textiles and the Department of Commerce, including PDEXCIL, TEXPROCIL and MATEXCIL.

India’s High Commissioner Santosh Jha, also visited the India Pavilion and interacted with participating Indian exhibitors and industry representatives.

Trade, Commerce, Food Security and Cooperative Development Minister Wasantha Samarasinghe, Deputy Industry and Entrepreneurship Minister Chathuranga Abeysinghe, addressed the India–Sri Lanka Textile Trade Forum. In their remarks, they highlighted the opportunities available in Sri Lanka for Indian exporters and investors, particularly in the textile and apparel sector.

The Forum also brought together representatives of prominent business chambers, including the Joint Apparel Association Forum (JAAF), and leading businesses, providing a platform for interaction between stakeholders from the textile industries of India and Sri Lanka.

In his remarks, the High Commissioner highlighted the strength of the India–Sri Lanka commercial partnership and the significant opportunities to further deepen bilateral trade and investment through stronger supply-chain linkages and industry-to-industry partnerships in the textile sector.

The textile and apparel sector is an important pillar of India–Sri Lanka trade and economic relations. The India–Sri Lanka Textile Trade Forum provided an opportunity to further strengthen business linkages and explore new avenues for mutually beneficial cooperation between the two countries.