Wars that redefine new world order

Two nuclear-armed superpowers are currently doing their darnedest to defeat two non-nuclear-weapon states militarily. All signs are that the US is heading into another military imbroglio. Its efforts to bomb Iran into submission have failed. Russia is fighting a protracted war with Ukraine, and there are no signs of the conflict coming to an end in the foreseeable future. However, these two wars are different. Ukraine is fully backed by the NATO members, especially the US; it is fighting a proxy war using arms and funds from the Western powers. It has received a wide range of missiles and missile-based systems from NATO members, ranging from short-range anti-tank and air-defence missiles to long-range cruise and ballistic missiles. Iran receives no such direct military support from its allies; it only receives indirect military assistance from China and Russia, according to international media reports.

At the time of going to press, Russia was intensifying retaliatory missile strikes on Ukraine. A heavy wave of Russian ballistic missile and drone strikes had hit Kyiv and surrounding regions. President Trump was all out to force Iran to agree to a peace deal on his terms. Trump apparently does not know whether he needs war or peace. He orders attacks on Iran and then calls for peace talks.

The West Asia conflict has taken a turn the US never bargained for. When he and Prime Minister of Israel Benjamin Netanyahu started the Iran war, the Hormuz Strait was open for international navigation, and the world oil prices were low. But five months into the conflict, Trump wants that chokepoint reopened to bring down oil prices. If he and Netanyahu had not carried out unprovoked attacks on Iran, the Hormuz Strait would not have been closed.

Fighting an asymmetric war, Iran has used the Hormuz chokepoint as a strategic lever to expand the conflict to the economic front. Trump says the US has restarted negotiations with Iran, which has denied his claim. While offering the olive branch, Trump threatens to ‘decapitate’ Iran.

Trump and Netanyahu laboured under the misconception that the killing of Iranian Supreme Leader Ayatollah Ali Khamenei and intense bombing would help engineer a swift regime change in Tehran, with the anti-establishment Iranians stepping up their protest campaign. They made a military miscalculation. They underestimated Iran’s resilience. Why Trump has decided to suspend military operations against Iran of his own volition is not difficult to understand.

The US cannot go on attacking Iran indefinitely. Trump’s war lacks popular support at home, and the US missile stockpiles are dwindling fast, making Washington more dependent on piloted bombing missions, according to military analysts. US midterm elections are due in November, and the Republicans are expected to suffer an electoral setback under Trump’s leadership. The continuation of the Iran war will make matters worse for the Trump administration.

The US has used up “virtually all” of its stockpile of missiles in five months of war with Iran, according to a Reuters report, quoting authoritative sources. These weapons reportedly include Army Tactical Missile Systems (ATACMS) and Precision Strike Missiles (PrSM). A CSIS (Centre for Strategic and International Studies) assessment published in May said the Iran campaign had depleted key inventories and that Tomahawk, THAAD and Patriot would take years to replenish. It classified Tomahawk, THAAD and Patriot as systems requiring many years to replace, while PrSM, etc., could be replenished in months. According to defence analysts, quoted by the media, falling missile supplies could limit the US’s ability to deter adversaries, including Russia and China, in a potential future attack. It is doubtful whether the US has ever been so vulnerable under previous Presidents.

President Trump has sought to pooh-pooh reports about dwindling US missile stockpiles. He and his Pentagon officials have claimed there are far more munitions than the US needs. If so, why he has stopped short of carrying out his threat to wage an all-out war against Iran is the question.

Where the conflicts in Ukraine and Iran will go from here is anyone’s guess. But they have manifestly reshaped the power dynamics of the post-Cold War era and are redefining the emerging world order.

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.