University of West London opens Sri Lanka Branch Campus

Seated from left: CEG Holdings and ANC Education Chairman Dr. Jagath Alwis, University of West London Vice Chancellor and President Professor Peter John CBE and Ceylinco Holdings PLC Executive Chairman and CEO Ajith Gunawardena

Standing from left: ANC Campus CEO Dayan Fernando, The UK Trade Envoy to Sri Lanka Lord Hannett of Everton, British High Commissioner to Sri Lanka Andrew Patrick and ANC Education Executive Director Dr. Punarjeeva Karunanayake

Newly established University of West London Sri Lanka Campus in Colombo

The University of West London (UWL) formally opened the University of West London Sri Lanka Branch Campus, the country’s first full UK university branch campus, marking a landmark development in Sri Lanka’s higher education sector.

The University of West London Sri Lanka Branch Campus is designed to bring a UK university learning experience closer to the students in Sri Lanka. The campus is operated by ANC Campus, a pioneer in the higher education sector in Sri Lanka, with over two decades of experience in delivering internationally recognised education.

The University of West London Sri Lanka Branch Campus gives the students the opportunity to study towards world-class UK degrees while remaining close to home. Academic delivery, assessment and quality assurance will be aligned with the UWL standards, with the university maintaining academic oversight of its courses and awards.

The students will have access to the UWL-approved programmes, academic support, learning resources and a campus environment designed to promote academic success, confidence and employability.

UWL Vice Chancellor and President Professor Peter John CBE said, “Today we celebrate a shared success and the next stage in our partnership with ANC Sri Lanka - the opening of the first overseas branch campus in collaboration with the UWL. This is a moment of transformation as we move from partnership to presence and from collaboration to permanence. It also signals our long-term commitment to higher education in Sri Lanka and a determination to bring an accessible high-quality university education to all who desire it.”

CEG Holdings and ANC Campus Chairman Dr. Jagath Alwis said, “For students and parents, the financial advantage is one of the most significant benefits. Studying locally can substantially reduce the overall cost of obtaining a UK university degree by eliminating many of the major expenses associated with studying overseas, including accommodation in London, living expenses, airfares, visa-related charges, Immigration Health Surcharge, accommodation deposits and relocation costs.

At its inception, the UWL Sri Lanka Branch Campus will offer programmes in business, IT, law, AI, psychology and early childhood education, subject to applicants meeting the UWL entry requirements. Professional accreditations or recognitions, where applicable, will be communicated through the official UWL-approved programme information.”

The UWL is recognised as the Best Modern University in London in The Times and The Sunday Times Good University Guide 2026, No. 1 London university for overall student satisfaction in the National Student Survey 2025 and a Top 5 UK university for student experience in the Daily Mail University Guide 2026.