SLPP breakaway MPs launch new political alliance

Podujana Eksath Nidahas Peramuna leader and Prime Minister Dinesh Gunawardena says alliance is positioning itself as a unifying force ahead of upcoming polls, promising to bring stability and progress

PENP Secretary and Minister Dr.Ramesh Pathirana expresses confidence in filling current political vacuum

A new political alliance was launched yesterday by the Sri Lanka Podujana Peramuna (SLPP) MPs who have extended their support for President Ranil Wickremesinghe in the 2024 Presidential election.

The newly launched, “Podujana Eksath Nidahas Peramuna”, is headed by Prime Minister Dinesh Gunawardena, with Minister Dr.Ramesh Pathirana as the Secretary of the Party.

The event also saw the MPs signing a common agreement and the unveiling of the alliances’ ‘trophy’ symbol at the event held at Water’s Edge Hotel in Battaramulla.

Addressing the gathering, Podujana Eksath Nidahas Peramuna leader and Prime Minister Dinesh Gunawardena said the new alliance is positioning itself as a unifying force ahead of the upcoming elections, promising to bring stability and progress to the country.

He underscored the importance of national unity and warned against falling victim to extremist ideologies.

He described the formation of the new political alliance as a significant moment in Sri Lanka’s history, uniting national and progressive forces to move the country forward.

“We have always prioritised a journey that aligns with the common people of this country. This path is not new, but it requires continued support and contributions from all sectors,” he said.

Reflecting on the political crisis two years ago, he credited the strength of democratic processes and the people’s vote for helping the country recover from unprecedented challenges.

Gunawardena stressed the importance of discipline and determination in governance. “We are committed to building a disciplined country through this front, listening to the people, and strengthening democracy. Throughout history, we have taken pride in the fact that our country, alongside India, has followed a democratic process, choosing its leaders through popular vote.”

He also focused on the need to build trust in Parliamentary democracy and invest in future generations. “This journey is for the young generation who act as a vanguard for social and economic progress. The eradication of violence and the promotion of non-violence are the key to preserving our democratic values.” The Prime Minister highlighted the collaboration with various political parties and the non-political sector in recent years, emphasising that these partnerships have restored confidence in stable governance.

He believes the upcoming elections are crucial for the Podujana Eksath Nidahas Peramuna and its allies, promising to work towards a stable Government following the 21 September Presidential election. Gunawardena also called for the development of the country through new opportunities, particularly for the younger generation engaged in fields like information technology.

He stressed the importance of international investments, promoting Sri Lanka as a self-sufficient country capable of contributing to global food production. “We must ensure that our country does not fall prey to extremist experiments. We have built strong international relationships, and our MPs have gained the trust of the global community. With the collective efforts of professionals, workers, youth and women, we will strive to create a more reliable Sri Lanka,” Gunawardena added.

Podujana Eksath Nidahas Peramuna Secretary and Minister Ramesh Pathirana hailed 5 September, as a historic day in Sri Lanka’s political landscape.

He drew comparisons to the creation of the Sri Lanka Podujana Peramuna (SLPP) in 2016, which garnered significant public support but faced challenges in maintaining that mandate.

Pathirana acknowledged the internal divisions within the SLPP, but assured supporters that the majority of the Parliamentary group, former provincial councillors, and local Government leaders remained with the Podujana Eksath Nidahas Peramuna.

He expressed confidence in filling the current political vacuum, promising that the UFF would provide representation for the hundreds of thousands of supporters. “We will contest all future elections in Sri Lanka, and we are confident of victory. Our alliance offers a clear and democratic path to victory, inviting all centrist and pro-democratic political groups to join us,” Pathirana added.