UDA Chairman Hemachandra joins Colombo Land and Development Board

Colombo Land and Development Company PLC has appointed Urban Development Authority Chairman M. G. Hemachandra to its Board as a Non-Executive Director.

Hemachandra is a distinguished professional of experience in development policy analysis and formulation, economic development program and project design, implementation, and post-evaluation. A veteran in corporate governance, strategic planning, project management, procurement, and Contract Administration, he holds an MBA in Infrastructure and a Bachelor of Engineering (Hons) from the University of Moratuwa.

As the UDA Chairman, Hemachandra provides strategic leadership to transform Sri Lanka’s urban development framework. His key priorities include strengthening transparent and efficient governance, revitalising strategic and stalled urban development projects, enhancing investor confidence and public–private partnership initiatives, and modernising urban policy and planning in line with sustainable development goals, smart city concepts, and national economic priorities. He is also focused on promoting integrated and sustainable urbanization, driving digital transformation through e-governance, fostering multi-agency coordination, and ensuring urban development contributes directly to GDP growth, employment generation, and improved living standards.

Previously, Hemachandra served as Chief of Yen Loan Operations at JICA Sri Lanka, overseeing development portfolios across water supply and sanitation, ports, airports, irrigation, agriculture, livestock, fisheries, and rural development sectors. His earlier professional experience includes service as Senior Engineer at the National Water Supply & Drainage Board, and Project Engineer at the Central Engineering Consultancy Bureau. He also sits on the boards of management and advisory councils for several prominent organisations.

In addition to serving as the Chairman of the Urban Development Authority, Hemachandra also serves as the Chairman of Urban Investment & Development Company Ltd. as a Director of Lanka Rest Houses Ltd., Ocean View Development Ltd., Urban Settlement Development Authority, Water’s Edge Ltd., and the Tea, Rubber & Coconut Estates (Control of Fragmentation) Board.

As of end-September 2025 the UDA was the third largest shareholder with a 17.45% stake after E.G. Ng (23.71%) and Hikkaduwa Beach Resort PLC (20.22%). Ceybank Unit Trust held a 5.96% stake.