Sri Lanka’s new Public Security Minister promises depoliticized, independent police

ECONOMYNEXT – Sri Lanka’s newly appointed Public Security Minister Ananda Wijepala promised to stop political interference in police matters and ensure independence for the police to implement law and order.

In his inaugural comments after assuming office as the Minister of Public Security which oversees police, passport and national identity card issuance said he will rectify the past concerns raised by the public.

Wijepala won the November 14 presidential poll under the ruling National People’s Power (NPP) in the Northwestern district of Kurunagala.

“One of the key promises among the many promises (by NPP) is establishing the rule of law in this country as well as bringing in justice and fairness to this country,” Wijepala, former Private Secretary to President Anura Kumara Dissanayake and National Organizer of the NPP’s National Intellectual Organization, told reporters in his first press conference as the Minister.

“I consider this ministry as one that could ease the pressure of the public. We have to ensure the security of the public and most of the institutions under the ministry are politicised. The main one is the police.”

“As of now, President Anura Kumara Dissanayake has taken many steps to depoliticise the police. If we need to establish the rule of law, the police have to ensure justice and fairness in implementing the laws. Similarly we will also ensure the independence of police. We expect to give the full backing to the police from our side without any political interference.”

“I hope the police as well as other related institutions have understood the mandate (given by the public). Continuously we have said we will eliminate bribery and corruption as well as misappropriation. We have to commit to that.”

He said there are a few institutions under his ministry which have created a bad image on the whole ministry.

“We will correct all those institutions and we have to do that because people have been waiting a long time to have freedom from pressure they have been undergoing for a long time.”

He also promised to address the issues faced by lower level police officials, the promotion and recruitment of police.

“These were politicised in the past. We will go on the merit basis, he said.

Wijepala, a long-time private secretary to the JVP leader, had served as a secretary for the anti-corruption secretariat established under the 2015-2019 government, which failed to eliminate corruption as promised before the election. (Colombo/November 19/2024)