Dialog, HNB General Insurance launch parametric insurance for fishermen via Sayuru App

Dialog Axiata PLC, Sri Lanka’s #1 connectivity provider, has partnered with HNB General Insurance, one of Sri Lanka’s leading insurance providers, to collaboratively address the growing risks posed by extreme weather, particularly rainfall, cyclones, wind speed and temperature. These parametric insurance solutions will be introduced through the Dialog Sayuru App.

Sayuru is a pioneering service by Dialog, the Department of Meteorology, and the Department of Fisheries and Aquatic Resources, that provides real-time, location-specific weather forecasts, emergency alerts, and essential maritime safety information to Sri Lankan fishermen. This groundbreaking partnership with HNB General Insurance will provide direct financial support to day-boat fishermen who are unable to work due to adverse weather conditions such as cyclones. By offering financial protection during periods when they cannot venture out to sea, the scheme ensures a stable income, reducing the financial hardships faced by these fishermen.

The insurance programme, facilitated through Dialog’s Sayuru App, allows day-boat fishermen to register for coverage. In the event of officially declared cyclone conditions, the insurance will be activated, ensuring compensation for affected fishermen. This collaboration between Dialog and HNB General Insurance highlights the companies’ shared commitment to strengthening the resilience and sustainability of Sri Lanka’s coastal communities, further expanding Sayuru’s role as a critical safety and financial empowerment tool for fishermen.

“This partnership enables us to expand the reach of parametric insurance and provide meaningful financial protection to communities impacted by extreme weather. As the first local insurer to enter this space, we are proud to lead this innovation and redefine what insurance can do for our people,” stated Sithumina Jayasundara, Director/CEO at HNB General Insurance.

“At Dialog, we remain committed to easing the financial burden faced by fishermen during extreme weather events, while advancing financial inclusion within coastal communities. Through this collaboration, we aim to support the adoption of digital financial services in the fisheries sector—enabling fishermen to manage their insurance needs securely and conveniently via the Sayuru App. We are also pleased to enhance maritime safety by equipping them with real-time weather insights to make informed, safer decisions at sea,” commented Supun Weerasinghe, Director / Group Chief Executive at Dialog Axiata PLC.

Sri Lanka Insurance Suba Pathum Scholarship awards 225 Scholarships for School Children

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.