The Sri Lanka–Japan Business Council leads successful delegation to Japan

The Sri Lanka–Japan Business Council of the Ceylon Chamber of Commerce successfully led a high-level business delegation to Japan in September 2025, coinciding with the official visit of Anura Kumara Dissanayake, President of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka.

The delegation, led by Krishan Balendra, Chairperson of the Ceylon Chamber of Commerce, with Mr. Kariyawasam, Immediate Past President, playing a pivotal role, attended the Sri Lanka Business Forum in Tokyo, organized and co-organized by the Japan External Trade Organization (JETRO), the Ministry of Economy, Trade and Industry (METI), the Japan–Sri Lanka Business Cooperation Committee, and the Board of Investment of Sri Lanka (BOI), with support from the Japan International Cooperation Agency (JICA).

The delegation also had the honor of attending a dinner hosted by the Japan Business Council, participating in the Sri Lanka Business Forum and Networking Session organized by the Export Development Board (EDB) in Osaka, and taking part in the Japan Expo, further strengthening bilateral business linkages.

The delegation’s efforts were supported by the Sri Lankan Embassy in Japan, including the Ambassador of Sri Lanka to Japan.

The forum featured opening remarks from ISHIGURO Norihiko, Chairman and CEO of JETRO, and KOBAYASHI Fumihiko, Chairman of the Japan–Sri Lanka Business Cooperation Committee, followed by remarks from Dr. OGUSHI Masaki, State Minister of Economy, Trade and Industry (METI), and a keynote address by President Anura Kumara Dissanayake. Presentations highlighted Sri Lanka’s digital economy, investment climate, and roadmap for an export-oriented industrial corridor by speakers including Dr. Hans Wijayasuriya, Toshiyuki Shimano, Ms. Miwako Kawashima, Nobuyuki Tanaka, and Ms. Arunya De Silva. The visit concluded with B2B networking sessions and reinforced the Council’s commitment to promoting Sri Lankan businesses in Japan and attracting strategic investments to Sri Lanka.

‘US sanctions preventing Russia and Sri Lanka from getting the best out of bilateral trade links’

Colombo Stock Exchange receives ‘Great Place To Work’ certification for 4th consecutive year

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.