PLC rings CSE market opening bell to commemorate 30th anniversary

People’s Leasing & Finance PLC (PLC) commemorated its 30th anniversary milestone by participating in a special market opening bell ringing ceremony on the trading floor of the Colombo Stock Exchange (CSE) on June 2, 2026, celebrating three decades of empowering individuals, entrepreneurs and businesses across the island with innovative financial solutions.

Established in 1995, People’s Leasing & Finance PLC has grown to become one of Sri Lanka’s leading non-banking financial institutions and a trusted financial solutions provider with an extensive islandwide presence. The company was listed on the Main Board of the CSE in 2011 and this year marks 15 years of its enduring partnership with the CSE. Over the years, PLC has continued to contribute to the nation’s economic progress through innovative financial products and customer-centric services.

Representing PLC at the event were Chairman Prof. Ajantha Samarakoon, Chief Executive Officer and General Manager Sanjeewa Bandaranayake, members of the corporate management team and distinguished invitees, while representing the CSE were Chairman Dimuthu Abeyesekera, CEO Rajeeva Bandaranaike and senior officials of the CSE.

Bandaranayake stated, “Celebrating 30 years of excellence is a significant milestone for PLC. Ringing the opening bell at CSE symbolises our longstanding commitment to corporate transparency, sustainable growth and value creation for all stakeholders. Over the past three decades, we have evolved into a trusted financial partner for millions of Sri Lankans and we remain committed to driving innovation and contributing towards the economic development of the country.”

He further noted that the company’s listing on the CSE Main Board in 2011 marked a historic milestone, being one of the largest initial public offerings (IPOs) in Sri Lanka’s capital market history and this year PLC celebrates its 15th year of excellence with the CSE.

Bandaranaike stated, “Fifteen years ago, we welcomed PLC to the Main Board of the CSE as one of the largest IPOs at the CSE – having raised R 7 billion. Since its inception 30 years ago the innovation and consistent growth of the company in the financial services sector, providing a variety of financing solutions to Sri Lankans, is a hallmark of the company.”