nVentures partners with DigiEcon Global Investment Summit to bring five leading international Venture Capital firms to Sri Lanka

nVentures Pte Ltd has partnered with the inaugural DigiEcon Global Investment Summit in 2024, organized by Sri Lanka’s Ministry of Technology. This initiative is part of the country’s far-reaching DigiEcon Sri Lanka 2030 economic strategy.

A Venture Capital (VC) fund licensed under the Monetary Authority of Singapore, with a startup portfolio representing Sri Lanka, Bangladesh, India, Singapore and the UK, nVentures has helped secure the attendance of five leading global VCs to participate, and explore the local startup sector, at this Summit that will be held on June 25.

A premier conference that serves as a gateway to explore Sri Lanka’s dynamic digital investment ecosystem, the DigiEcon Global Investment Summit 2024 expects to bring together 80 plus investors, including major international players, and over 50 technology companies. At the heart of the DigiEcon Global Investment Summit is the opportunity to interact with a diverse group of worldwide delegates, wherein participants will have the chance to expand their networks, explore new partnerships, and interact with thought leaders, all in an environment geared for collaboration.

“Sri Lanka’s digital economy is experiencing a remarkable transformation. Our groundbreaking DigiEcon 2030 strategy, a comprehensive 7-year plan developed in collaboration with industry leaders and the World Bank, sets an ambitious target of growing our digital sector to $15 billion by 2030. As a key initiative within this strategy, we are proud to present the DigiEcon Global Investment Summit 2024. This event offers a unique opportunity to explore Sri Lanka’s dynamic tech ecosystem, connect with influential stakeholders, and uncover the immense potential for growth in our digital landscape.” – Hon. Kanaka Herath, State Minister of Technology

The VCs that will attend the DigiEcon Global Investment Summit are Quest Ventures, Accelerating Asia, Tenity, Striders Corporation and Orvel. In addition, the following high powered executives from Quest Ventures, Accelerating Asia and Tenity will lend their valuable and wide-ranging experience to the Summit, by taking part as guest speakers.

James Tan is Managing Partner at Quest Ventures, which focuses on an overarching ‘digital economy’ strategy across Asia, and is a top venture capital firm in artificial intelligence, e-commerce and marketplaces, entertainment, finance, food, insurance, logistics, media, property, sports, and the Islamic digital economy. Quest’s portfolio companies include industry leaders such as 99.co, Carousell, Carro, Glife, Hepmil, Oddle, Shopback, VulcanPost, Xfers, and Yummy Corporation.

Janashakthi Life soars: Q1 Gross Written Premiums up 44%, Profit Before Tax grows 29%

‘RPCs to continue to contest govt. imposed 70% wage hike in courts’

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.