Sri Lanka Podujana Peramuna to decide on election after Basil’s return

ECONOMYNEXT — The national organiser of the ruling Sri Lanka Podujana Peramuna (SLPP) will take a decision on whether to contest the 2024 presidential election on its own or support a candidate fielded by an alliance party is part of, a spokesman said.

SLPP legislator Piyal Nishantha told reporters that Rajapaksa is set to arrive in the country on Tuesday March 05.

“The SLPP has no wish to count its eggs before they’re hatched. Our national organiser is a very creative leader that steered the party to victory in a very short period of time,” said Nishantha.

Following Rajapaksa’s return, said Nishantha, the SLPP’s executive committee, headed by Rajapaksa, will decide whether to form an alliance and “provide an opportunity to a candidate” or field its own candidate at the presidential poll that’s due to be held between September 17 and October 17 this year.

“From that moment on, we’ll say compete with us and see if you can,” said Nishantha.

President Ranil Wickremesinghe has said that a presidential election will be held this year before a parliamentary election in 2025. However, some opposition groups have expressed uncertainty over the matter.

In a recent interview with India’s WION network, Wickremesinghe was noncommittal about contesting the presidential election that should constitutionally be held by at least October 17 this year. He did, however, say “both presidential and parliament” elections are due when asked about elections happening in 2024.

Asked how optimistic he is of his own chances, Wickremesinghe said: “For me to be back, I must contest.”

When pressed for his plan, he said: “I have come here to put the economy into order. My first order is to focus on that we get out of bankruptcy.”

There was no confirmation from the president that he would definitely be running.

Meanwhile, there are reports that Wickremesinghe wishes to abolish the executive presidency.

Sri Lanka Freedom Party to support abolishing presidency; SJB cries foulSee more