The Democratic National Convention 2024 – “Hope is making a comeback”

The most crucial week for the Democrats in the current election season ended last week, with a resounding triumph for the Democratic Party at its Convention in Chicago. The next few days will indicate how much the events of last week would impact the ongoing surge of support the Harris/Walz ticket has enjoyed since President Biden made the selfless decision of patriotism by not seeking re-election two weeks ago. This was a decision which upended the projections of most of the polls, which were then projecting Trump cruising to victory in November.

In fact, it was looking increasingly certain that Trump’s Republican Party would not only win the White House, but both Houses of Congress with unstoppable majorities; that Trump and United States Presidents of the future will be taking their oath of the presidency, not on the Constitution ratified by the Founders of the nation in 1787, but on Project 2025, a neo-Nazi, white supremacist playbook published by the radical red Heritage Foundation. An Agenda based on the contemptible concepts of Hitler’s Third Reich, informally known as The Unified Reich of America, mostly authored by the some of the senior members of the cabinet of Trump’s first administration. And Trump’s running mate, J.D. Vance is closely associated with Project 2025, and has in fact written the Foreword of a forthcoming sequel by the Foundation. Project 2025 is based on the Nazi Playbook that led to the logical white supremacist conclusion of ethnic cleansing, genocide and the holocaust.

However, since President Biden made the selfless decision not to seek re-election on June 27, there has been a surge of energy favoring the Democratic ticket, with Kamala Harris drawing level, even leading in both the national and some crucial swing-state polls, where Trump had hitherto been ahead by comfortable margins.

A surge which began as a honeymoon, has now become a groundswell sweeping the nation with a wave of optimism, hope and joy, a reaction against the epidemic of division, racism, hatred and violence that has been percolating, polluting the nation during the Trump years.

Trump is suddenly forced to face the grim reality that the only mentally and physically incapacitated octogenarian candidate for the presidential election in November he had been insulting and mocking, is none other than himself. And he is terrified that his future will not be in the White House, but as a convicted criminal in the Big House.

The Time Magazine release of its cover page, featuring a beautiful sketch of Vice-President Kamala Harris evoked mixed emotions in the spectacularly perverted mind of Donald Trump. His first impulse was, predictably for one of the filthiest minds in history, lust. In an interview with Elon Musk, he salivated, “She looks like the most beautiful woman ever to live”. That was immediately replaced with jealousy coupled with denial. “The sketch didn’t look anything like Kamala, it made her look a little the great First Lady, but of course, Melania is much more beautiful”. Finally, and inevitably, narcissism, when he said at a rally in Wilkes-Barre, Pennsylvania, “I am much better-looking than Kamala, and I don’t think she’s a very bright person, as I am”.

The youthful, attractive, articulate Prosecutor against the obese octogenarian rapist, squirming under 34 felonies, with many more awaiting trials; add to that a hair-weave of a blonde weasel, a spray-tanned orange skin and an IQ that barely clears that of a moron: Folks, we have a winner!

Day one of the Convention, Monday, August 19, belonged to President Biden. It included speeches from Hillary Clinton, First Lady Jill Biden and many other prominent Democrats, including my personal favorite and the future of the nation, Alexandria Ocasio Cortez (AOC), who, in my biased opinion, was brilliant.

President Biden was given a loving introduction by his daughter and “best friend”, Ashley.

After four minutes of a spontaneous, emotional standing ovation, with overwhelming themes of love and gratitude, Biden gave the forcible speech he never wanted to give, but did so anyway for the love of party and country. He was the very definition of a patriot. He focused on his achievements which have made America the strongest economy in the world, while acknowledging there was much more to be done. He said he owed much of the credit for these achievements to his Vice-President, saying that his choice of Kamala Harris was one of the best decisions he made in his life. He handed over the torch to the next generation, perhaps with a trace of sadness, even bitterness, at what he may have perceived to be unfinished business, quoting the final stanza of “The American Anthem”:

Let them say of me, I was the one who believed in sharing the blessings I received. Let me know in my heart, when my days are through, America, America, I give my best to you.”

The second day of the Convention featured the ceremonial roll calls of the delegates of states, proudly casting their votes to reaffirm the presidency of Kamala Harris; and speeches by Second Gentleman and husband of Kamala Harris, Doug Emhoff, Governor of Illinois, J.B. Pritzker, Senator Bernie Sanders, and many others.

Doug Emhoff gave a humorous, self-deprecatory speech about his relationship with a very strong woman he had met on a blind date, a woman who cares for their modern, “blended” family just as she will care for the diverse society that is America. A senior partner of a global law firm based in San Francisco, with personal earnings of millions of dollars, Emhoff showed his integrity by severing all connections with the firm when Kamala assumed the post of Vice-Presidency in 2021. He has since been teaching law at Georgetown Law School.

But the thunder was stolen by former President Barack and Michelle Obama, the most admired and popular couple in America, probably the world, even eight years after the conclusion of the greatest presidency in US history. Joe Biden’s one-term presidency will not be far behind.

I have neither the talent nor the space to do justice to describe the powerful orations of the most inspiring political leaders of the country in my memory. And I am old and fortunate enough to have been inspired by the soaring oratory of John F. Kennedy and Rev. Martin Luther King, Jr.

The Obamas were the perfect messengers for delivering the Democratic message of freedom, urging Americans to embrace Harris, and reject the era of division and hatred of Trump. Both gave blistering attacks on Trump which were so cleverly constructed that Trump probably didn’t realize he was being mocked. In fact, Trump said after the Convention that he had always respected the Obamas!

Michelle went first. She gave the more fiery attack against Trump, when she said, “For years, Donald Trump did everything in his power to try to make people fear us. His limited and narrow view of the world made him threatened by the existence of hard working, highly educated, successful people who also happened to be black. Who’s going to tell him that the job he’s currently seeking might be one of those ‘Black jobs’?

“It’s the same old con: doubling down on ugly, misogynistic, racist lies as a substitute for real ideas and solutions that will actually make people’s lives better. My girl, Kamala is more than ready for this moment. She is one of the most qualified people to seek the office of the presidency. And she is one of the most dignified”.

Michelle had the line of the Convention, when she brought the house down by paraphrasing her husband’s historic campaign slogan in 2008: “Hope is making a comeback”.

President Obama admitted that he had the formidable task of following Michelle, but he did not fail us. He brought down the House with an oration brimming with humor and brilliance.

“Now the torch has been passed. Now it’s up to all of us to fight for the America we believe in. And make no mistake: it will be a fight. For all the incredible energy we have been able to generate over the past few weeks, this will be a tight race in a closely divided country – a country where too many Americans are struggling and don’t believe the government can help.

“It’s been a constant stream of gripes and grievances that’s actually gotten worse now that Trump is afraid of losing to Kamala. The childish nicknames and weird obsession with crowd sizes only serve to emphasize his insecurity”.

The hand gestures and the quizzical smile when he was describing “sizes” made it obvious that he was not talking about crowd sizes! Obama would make a great stand-up comedian.

“Most of all, Trump wants us to believe the country is hopelessly divided….It’s one of the oldest tricks in politics – from a guy whose act has gotten pretty stale. We don’t need four more years of bluster, bumbling and chaos. We’ve seen that movie – and we all know that the sequel’s usually worse.

“America is ready for a new chapter. America is ready for a new story….That’s the America Kamala Harris and Tim Walz believe in. An America where “We the People” includes everyone. A return to an America that taps what Lincoln called ‘the better angels of our nature’.

“And if we work hard, like we’ve never worked before, we’ll elect Kamala Harris and Tim Walz to the White House…and build a country that is more secure, more just, more equal and more free”. For everyone.

Day three of the Convention continued with speeches from some of the great political orators of our time, led by a typically humorous speech from former President Bill Clinton.

He began by praising President Biden, who “came to office during the pandemic and an economic crash. He healed us and got us back to work. He strengthened our alliances for freedom and security.

“Perhaps the greatest test of anyone in power is whether they’re willing to relinquish it. George Washington knew that and it enhanced his legacy. The same is now true for Joe Biden.

“Mr. President, thank you for your courage, compassion and class; for your service and your sacrifice. You’ve not only kept the faith – you’re spreading the faith”.

Clinton said we have a clear choice in November: Kamala Harris, representing “We, the People” against Donald Trump, representing “Me, myself and I”.

“I know which one I like….Kamala Harris will solve problems, seize opportunities, ease our fears and make sure every American can chase their dreams”.

And Donald? He will use his time “mainly to talk about himself – his vengeance, vendettas, complaints, conspiracies….dividing, blaming, belittling. He is the curator and creator of chaos.

“Do you want affordable housing, affordable healthcare….strengthen our alliances and stand up for freedom and democracy around the world? Do you want to save our country and the world from the calamities of climate change? Or obsess on the vital debate between getting eaten by sharks or electrocuted?”

“Take it from the man from Hope, Arkansas. Kamala is the woman of Joy. And we will make a joyful noise on election day if you do your part”.

Other notable speakers included television icon Oprah Winfrey, the most influential woman in America after Michelle Obama. She made a surprise appearance at the Convention, strolling on stage in a purple pantsuit to a deafening standing ovation.

“You know I am telling you the truth, that decency and character are on the ballot in 2024….Let us choose loyalty to the Constitution over loyalty to any individual. Let us choose optimism over cynicism, inclusion over retribution, common sense over nonsense. And let us choose the sweet promise of tomorrow over the bitter return to yesterday. Because that’s the best of America.

“We won’t go back. We won’t be set back, pushed back, bullied back, kicked back.

“So let us choose Truth, let us choose Honor, let us choose Joy. But more than anything else, let us choose Freedom. Why? Because that’s the best of America. We’re all Americans. And together, let’s all choose Kamala Harris!”

The keynote speech was made by the Vice-Presidential nominee, Minnesota Governor Tim Walz. He accepted his party’s nomination for Vice-President, saying, “We’re all here tonight for one beautiful reason; we love this country”.

Before Walz was scheduled to speak, a dozen players of the team he helped coach to a Minnesota state championship decades ago ran on stage, wearing their old football jerseys and dancing to a marching band. The crowd waved signs and chanted “COACH, COACH” when he made his appearance on the stage.

The most poignant moment of the Convention was when Walz’s 17-year-old son, Gus, stood up, pointed at the stage and, sobbing with pride, shouted, “That’s my dad”!

Walz, who looks like everyone’s favorite uncle, talked about growing up in a small town in Nebraska, enrolling in the Army National Guard when he was 17, “proudly wearing our nation’s uniform for 24 years”. He graduated from Minnesota State University thanks to the GI bill and started his career as high school teacher in geography and social studies and a football coach.

“So there I was, a 40-something high school teacher with little kids, zero political experience and no money. And ran for a deep red Congress seat in Minnesota. And I won! You know what? Never underestimate a public-school teacher. Never”.

“I represented my neighbors in Congress for 12 years and learned an awful lot….Then I came back home to serve as Minnesota’s governor, and got right to work, making a difference in our neighbors’ lives”.

From cutting taxes for the middle class, investing in affordable housing and protecting reproductive freedom, and achieving many other benefits for ordinary hard-working Americans, Walz had one golden rule:

“Look, we’ve got 76 days. That’s nothing. There’ll be time to sleep when we’re dead….That’s how we’ll turn the page on Donald Trump. That’s how we’ll build a country where workers come first, health care and housing are human rights and the government stays the hell out of your bedroom…A place where no child is left hungry, where no community is left behind, where nobody gets told they don’t belong.

“And as the next President of the United States always says, when we fight, we win”.

“Coach Walz” will probably attract new voters for the Democrats in November; he certainly charmed the audience, with his authenticity and simplicity. There is also no doubt that he helped to balance Harris’ coastal roots as a cultural representative of Midwestern states whose voters she needs to win this election.

Anyone who doesn’t believe that a small-town high school teacher and football coach, serving in the Army National Guard for 24 years, graduating from a state university on the GI bill and serving his neighbors as Congressman and governor for two decades is not the epitome of the American Dream should go vote for Trump. Tere is no room for morons in the Democratic party.

The final day of the Convention featured many wonderful speakers, including Maya Harris, Kamala’s younger sister. But the day belonged to the star, who met the moment, who made the speech of her life, when she accepted the presidential nomination of the Democratic Convention.

A remarkable, 37-minute address that rivaled the unachievable – the acceptance speech of Barack Obama at the Democratic National Convention of 2008.

During her speech, Kamala addressed her views – and her solutions – of the pressing problems facing the country: The economy, immigration, reproductive rights, gun violence, healthcare, income and wealth inequality, homelessness, and many more, intolerable and inexplicable for the richest country in the world.

A unifying speech that exposed the divisive vulgarity that her presidential opponent dishes out all too often for the doggerel it is. A speech that probably clinched her victory in November.

Kamala described the reason she became a prosecutor – to protect people like her best friend in high school who confided in her that she was being abused by her stepfather.

“That is why I became a prosecutor. To protect people like this. Because everyone has a right: To safety. To dignity. And to justice.

“As a prosecutor when I had a case, I charged it not in the name of the victim. But in the name of “The People”.

“For a simple reason. In our system of justice, a harm against any one of us is a harm against all of us.

“I would often explain this, to console survivors of crime. To remind them: No one should be made to fight alone. We are all in this together.

“Every day in the courtroom, I stood proudly before a judge and said five words: Kamala Harris. For the People. And to be clear: My entire career, I have had only one client, The People”.

“And so, on behalf of The People, on behalf of every American. Regardless of party. Gender. Or the language your grandmother speaks.

On behalf of everyone whose story could only be written in the greatest nation on Earth.

“I accept your nomination for the United States of America”.

.The words that will remain etched in my memory forever, the words that make me confident that, at last, we have a leader who will ensure that the vicious specter of Trump and his white supremacist, phony Christian cult, will be finally driven ever smaller in the back view mirror of the nation, are:

Bringing 1971 insurgency under control and tension between coalition partners

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.