Sinopec extends Clean Sri Lanka network with new look stations across Anuradhapura

Sinopec reaffirmed its commitment to uplifting Sri Lanka’s energy infrastructure and community standards with the completion of three upgraded fuel stations and one brand-new Station in Anuradhapura, marking a major milestone in the company’s nationwide expansion in support of the national Clean Sri Lanka initiative.

Located across Eppawala, Srawasthipura, New Town, and the northern edge of the City, these stations represent Sinopec’s bold step into the North Central Province. The newly renovated New City Lanka station, in particular, stands out as a model facility with the second of its kind water filtration system, a community hydration initiative that debuted during the Madhu Church festival earlier last year. Creating access to clean water for those in need is a mission that Sinopec has undertaken through its Clear Spring CSR initiative.

Through extensive studies conducted on the country and the community development needs of Sri Lanka, Sinopec has chosen to align itself with the dire need for accessible drinking water to the communities, especially in the North Central province where the scarcity of clean drinking water is causing significant amounts of health risks for communities.

The event was attended by Clean Sri Lanka Anuradhapura District Cordinator Samarathunga Herath. His presence reinforced the national importance of this initiative and the government’s recognition of Sinopec’s long-term partnership in advancing infrastructure, environmental standards, and community well-being in Sri Lanka.

All four stations are compliant with the recommendations made by the Clean Sri Lanka Committee, and feature upgraded multifunctional washrooms, redesigned service points, and improvements in safety. The modernized stations include the Sinoceylon which is a newly built Filling Station and will now reflect the company’s commitment to adherence with international standards in fuel retail and customer service. What sets these stations apart include Sinopec’s proprietary six-step fueling method, modernized facilities and enhanced energy sector training programs for frontline staff.

“These stations are more than just fuel stops. They are expressions of trust, respect, and partnership with the people of Anuradhapura and Sri Lanka at large,” stated Wang Haini, General Manager of Sinopec. “It is an honour to deepen our partnerships with our dealers and to invest in the historic kingdom city of Anuradhapura”

Sinopec’s new look stations in Anuradhapura marks a deliberate investment in decentralizing quality service and infrastructure to the provinces. These sites are tailored to the local needs of travelers, families, and workers across the region.

The unveiling also highlighted Sinopec’s commitment to training and capacity-building within the energy sector. Over the past two years, the company has Training Programs in emergency fire response, first aid, and safety protocol training for over 300 station operators across all 9 provinces. This Energy Talent Growth Programme continues to upskill Station Managers to meet the growing professional demands of the industry.

Together with the support of its Dealers, Sinopec continues to strengthen its role as a community-first energy provider in Sri Lanka, aligning every infrastructure investment with national development priorities and global sustainability benchmarks. In the months ahead, the company will expand its Clear Spring initiative across more regions, as well as introduce innovative service features that redefine fueling convenience for Sri Lankans nationwide.

Mild Earth to take Sri Lankan spices to global stage with ‘Wild Mist Water’

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.