The Old Fox and his followers

The 119th birth anniversary of the first Executive President of Sri Lanka, J. R. Jayewardene (JRJ) falls today. The Old Fox is long gone but his legacy endures, with even his fiercest critics following in his footsteps.

All those who sought to oust or even kill JRJ, denounced his policies and condemned him vehemently for attacks on democracy, have emulated him all these years. The SLFP, which came to power, promising to undo what JRJ had done, chose to continue his policies and programmes, and did not carry out its pledge to abolish the executive presidency. The leaders of the SLFP and the SLPP (an SLFP offshoot) held the executive presidency for about 28 years. Chandrika Bandaranaike Kumaratunga and Mahinda Rajapaksa became two-term Presidents, representing the SLFP. Eventually, the SLPP had to bring in JRJ’s nephew, Ranil Wickremesinghe, as an interim President to straighten up the economy it had bankrupted under President Gotabaya Rajapaksa’s watch.

JRJ stood up for what he believed in and pursued his autocratic desires openly. His predecessors have abused the executive powers he vested in the presidency generously and given free rein to their dictatorial ambitions while pontificating to others on the virtues of democracy. If they had been really keen to do away with the powerful executive presidency, they could have got together and done so decades ago.

There have been some half-hearted attempts to reduce the executive powers of the President, but the executive presidency remains extremely powerful for all practical purposes. The President has all state institutions under his/her thumb, and the so-called Independent Commissions have become mere rubber stamps for him/her. The Executive President also has the state prosecutor and the police chief on a string.

JRJ made no bones about his antipathy towards trade unions, which he wrongly considered an impediment to economic development. He crushed strikes in the most ruthless manner, and in 1980 he sacked tens of thousands of state sector workers who struck work. Four and a half decades on, a government led by the JVP threatens to deal with strikers in a similar manner, its threats to postal strikers, a few weeks ago, being a case in point.

All governments formed by parties other than the UNP pledged to upend JRJ’s economic policies, which however remain intact. The SLFP and its leaders had no qualms about privatising profitable state ventures on some pretext or another. The practice continues.

Perhaps, there cannot be a greater posthumous tribute to JRJ than a self-proclaimed Marxist outfit that went all out to destroy him and his government, albeit in vain, adopting his policies and cherishing the executive presidency he created. The main battle cry of the JVP in the late 1980s was “Kill JR”. The JVP said it would never forgive JRJ for liberalising the economy, introducing the executive presidency, suppressing democratic dissent, manipulating the legal and judicial processes, keeping the police under his thumb, privatising state ventures, for being pro-American, capitulating to India, signing the Indo-Lanka Accord and establishing the Provincial Councils (PCs). Today, the JVP has secured the presidency as well as a two-thirds majority in the parliament; it has signed several undisclosed pacts with India, including one on defence. It accused JRJ of ‘having knelt before India’ under duress, but today its leaders are grovelling before their Indian counterparts of their own volition. It is going to hold the PC polls!

The JVP, in its Revolutionary Policy Programme (RPP) published while its founder Rohana Wijeweera and JRJ were alive, said, “Foreign capital in every sphere shall be vested in the state without any payment of compensation … Free Trade Zones shall be abolished. Their business undertakings and properties within such Zones shall be vested in the state without any payment of compensation … Banks and Credit Institutions and all monopoly industries shall be nationalized without any payment of compensation” (p 23). The RPP ends thus: Death to imperialism – Liberation to the people! Death to Capitalism – Victory to Socialism!” Today, the JVP-led NPP is receiving ‘robber barons’, including Casino czars, with open arms and appealing for foreign investment. It has become a darling of the US, and ignores calls for it to join BRICS, an association representing emerging economies and offering a counterweight to the US-led western bloc.

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.