Tissa and Sonia Weeratunga

I will be turning 59 in a few days. Strangely or maybe not so strangely as I grow older I think more often of my late parents, how they were when they were my age, what they did and this makes me reflect on what I do now.

My father, Tissa Indraka Weeratunga, the first four-star general of the regular forces of the Sri Lanka Army, was promoted on his 55th birthday, August 29, 1985. He was the first ever Chief of Defence Staff and the ninth Army Commander in independent Sri Lanka. This is not the place to roll out his extensive curriculum vitae. To me, he was the person who understood me most, cheered me on when I excelled in sports, never missing a single rugger match when I played for Royal and CR&FC, and encouraged me to show similar commitment to my studies.

It was when tears welled up in his eyes at my graduation in Ottawa, Canada, that I first recognized how much my success meant to him. He passed away in 2003, leaving fond memories and the ache of loss that time has not lessened, not in the 21 years that have passed.

My mother, Sonia Weeratunga nee Rode, was my father’s greatest strength. It was she, along with the late Mrs Srimani Athulathmudali, who launched the Seva Vanitha Unit of the Sri Lanka Army in 1984 under my father’s guidance. She was the first President of Seva Vanitha. Again, proud though I am of her work, she was first and last my rock.

It seems to me that she had a separate career unbeknownst to any one else, that of bailing me out of one crisis after another. The deaths of my father and sister coupled with my brother migrating to Australia brought us even closer in the last 15 to 20 years of my life. We were inseparable but alas that time is now over. She’s gone and I hold on to memories.

I am old enough to know that I’ve lived more years than the years left for me. I am an orphan now, but my parents gave me enough years of love and offered enough opportunities for me to learn an important lesson in life — our parents pass on, but much of who we are is what they ingrained in us. Such things I remember, nurture and in this way keep them close to me, always.

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.