Paw-Sperity  Xtravaganza: A day out for whole family on 29 March

The Paw-Sperity Xtravaganza, to be held on 29 March at the Cinnamon Grand, in aid of Rescue Animals Sri Lanka (RAS), promises to be a day filled with fun, good food, shopping and entertainment, one that  ushers  in Avurudu Cheer as well as Easter Joy.

This year Browns Veterinary  Pharmaceuticals have come on board to partner with RAS, while a Kiddies play area, run by the ABC Group of Schools with both indoor handicrafts and an outdoor play area, will keep your little ones fully entertained while you shop till you drop. A traditional welcome by none other than the Easter Bunny and the Village Headman, Rabban players, Kavum Ammes, a staggering selection of exciting goodies from over 50 stalls, perfect for gift-giving and personal indulgence, makes Paw-Sperity a treat for the entire family , with  tradition combining good cheer, and all for a worthy cause —Animal Welfare.

This year sees a departure from tradition, as instead of one particular Chief Guest, RAS will recognize a  number of their supporters and well-wishers who have helped them over the years,  all of whom will light the oil lamp and declare the opening of the Bazaar. Paw-Sperity which actually combines the words paw and prosperity, symbolize  what this event is all about – animal welfare and prosperity for all. What’s more,  Little Jax, a miniature Dachshund who is the RAS mascot, will also be present to light the oil lamp, all dressed up for the occasion in a batik sarong , gifted to him,  from well-known Batik Brand CHERUB.

Another heartwarming feature of this year’s Paw-Sperity  Xtravaganza will be the presence of children from the Indira Cancer Trust who will be treated to games and handicrafts at the Kiddies Play Area. It is hoped that as many children who are in the recovery stages will be present to enjoy some Avurudu cheer and Easter joy.

Ladies, gents, and kids clothing, footwear, cosmetics, both Batik as well as regular saris, jewellery, skin care, handmade Designer handbags, accessories, homemade wines, chutneys and pickles, organic foods, Xmas décor, table and bed linen, cushions, arts and crafts, stationery and greeting cards, crochet and knitted products, scented candles, perfumes, health  and gluten free foods , vegan foods , bath and body care, Avurudu and Easter goodies, a range of specialty foods from the Cinnamon Grand, household items,  and well – just about everything you need for a Very Prosperous Avurudu and a Joyous Easter will be on sale.

RAS Co-founder Anusha David said she was delighted about the fact that 95% of the stall holders were those who had taken part in RAS’ first ever fundraiser the Santapaws Extravaganza which was held on 1 December 2024. “ All the hard work, effort, and  late nights are worth it when you have people placing their faith and trust in you. Animals have and always been my passion .

Any animal or reptile is worthy of help, and all humans need to understand that without animals this planet cannot continue to exist. As a matter of fact we are witnessing its destruction right now. It’s happening before our very eyes and if we do not act immediately it will be too late; very frankly it is already too late. It is not the remedy  that is called for, but prevention , and an understanding that a quick fix can never be the solution. The development of our hearts and minds is required; mere investment in bricks and mortar don’t amount to development.”

The proceeds from the bazaar will go towards supporting RAS’ street animal welfare work as well as their shelter, and their ongoing court cases with regards to the elephants .

David was fulsome in her praise of all their partners who have collaborated with them over the years.

“The Cinnamon Grand, the  Wijeya Newspapers Group, Gravitas - Advertising partners, and Zelus Consult our Social Media partners are ‘Simply the Best’, and words are inadequate to express my thanks to them for their wholehearted support and cooperation which go beyond the boundaries. Indeed the Cinnamon Grand is the best address in town and exemplifies Corporate Social  Responsibility which encompasses not just human welfare, but the environment and animals as well,” added David.