Negative impact on schoolchildren;An eye-opener for Women’s & Child Ministry

The growing trend of kids and school-goers participating in beauty pageants, and modelling, in the scene here, is certainly an area of concern.

These activities can have a profound impact on a child’s self-esteem, education, and overall well-being.

Parents must be vigilant and ensure that their children’s participation in such events does not compromise their education or safety.

Recent statistics, and news reports, have shed light on the disturbing trends affecting our schoolchildren.

The alarming rate of schoolgirl pregnancies, as highlighted by Minister Saroja Paulraj, is a stark reminder of the need for urgent action.

Furthermore, the results of the 2024 G.C.E. Advanced Level Examination are equally concerning, with over 10% of students failing to secure a simple pass in any of their main subjects.

The education system and child welfare authorities must take immediate action to address these issues. The fact that one in three Sri Lankan adolescents is not attending school, as reported recently, is a grim reality that demands attention.

It’s imperative that the authorities, including the Education Department and the Women’s & Child Ministry, work together to identify the root causes of these problems and implement effective solutions.

According to knowledgeable sources one of the main reasons is that today’s kids and school-goers are heavily involved in frivolous activities, like modelling and pageants, and, thus, their education is neglected. You can’t combine the two, can you?

A local teen was also shown on social media, in a swimsuit, at an international event.

Unfortunately, nowadays, parents seem hell-bent in depriving their kids of childhood freedom and joy. Their only concern is to have their kids in the spotlight, and in activities not connected with their education.

In one instance, there was a contest inviting kids, and I repeat, kids, to promote tourism and culture. Kids to promote tourism and culture!

* Teach them about personal space and the importance of saying “no.”

* Listen to their instincts if they feel uncomfortable around someone.

* Set boundaries and prioritise their child’s safety above all else.

The question being asked by many is what are the schools doing, the teachers, the Education Department, the Women’s & Child Ministry!

Yes, there are growing concerns and debates around the world about the impact of child beauty pageants on young participants.

Some critics argue that these events can lead to anxiety, depression, low self-worth and stress due to intense competition and pressure to win and there’s also a growing trend towards stricter regulations and increased awareness about the potential negative impacts on children.

The Minister of Women’s & Child Affairs, Saroja Paulraj, must take immediate action to address these pressing issues. It’s time for the authorities to work together to ensure that Sri Lankan schoolchildren receive the education and protection they deserve.

Parents, remember at the end of the day, your child’s safety is in your hands. Stay alert, stay cautious, and protect them at all costs.

Saving Sri Lanka’s rubber: Why CLSD must be tackled by RRISL without delay

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.