Sri Lanka president to contest election under independent party symbol: UNP

ECONOMYNEXT — Sri Lanka President Ranil Wickremesinghe will be next to an independent symbol on the ballot paper, according to United National Party (UNP) general secretary Palitha Range Bandara.

Bandara told reporters that the ruling Sri Lanka Podujana Peramuna (SLPP) will have its symbol, the lotus bud, on the ballot if the party decides to contest.

He was responding to a question about a comment SLPP parliamentarian Namal Rajapaksa had made that the lotus bud would definitely appear on the ballot paper no matter what.

“If the SLPP contests, their symbol will be there on the ballot paper. Mr Ranil Wickremesinghe will be contesting under an independent symbol, so for us there is no issue of a lotus bud being there,” he said.

Bandara also reiterated that the presidential election will definitely be held this year, despite speculation to the contrary.

“We’re getting ready for a presidential election. The election commission is ready for a presidential election. No matter who makes what request, a parliamentary election can only be held in 2025, not 2024. According to the constitution, the presidential election must be held on time, so it definitely will be,” he said.

Main opposition Samagi Jana Balawegaya (SJB) MP Rohana Bandara speaking to reporters said the government has been resorting to various tactics to delay the election.

“The SJB will provide leadership to mobilising people against any attempt to postpone the presidential election,” he said.

Meanwhile, SJB legislator Field Marshall Sarath Fonseka, who has publicly criticised the party leadership, told reporters that a presidential election has not yet been declared. If someone is declaring their candidacy prematurely, he said, that betrays a fear and insecurity of someone else taking their place.

He added that Sri Lankans must move on from the culture of politicians giving things away during election cycles.

“Or they can accept the things being distributed and say ‘thanks for this, but we’re not going to vote for you just because you gave us something’,” he said. (Colombo/Apr22/2024)