Browns signs pioneering Industrial Digitalisation MoU with Sri Jayewardenepura Uni.

Brown & Company Director/CEO Sanakan Thamotharampillai (left) and University of Sri Jayewardenepura Dean of Faculty of Engineering Dr. Nishan Dharmaweera exchange the MoU. Others (from left): Brown & Company Lead – IoT Solutions Sithija Rathnayake, Senior Automation Engineer Ashane Senevirathne, Team Lead – IoT Solutions Pubudu Dharmathilake, Tech Lead Chathura Edirisinghe, Senior Manager – Digital Transformation Nadeesha De Jeodth, Head of IT Prasanna Ganegoda, University of Sri Jayewardenepura HOD of Faculty of Computer Engineering Dr. Udaya Wijenayake, and HOD of Faculty of Engineering Dr. Uditha Wijewardhana

Brown & Company’s Digital Transformation Solutions Strategic Business Unit recently signed a path-breaking Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) with the University of Sri Jayewardenepura.

The agreement was initiated to enable industrial digitalisation through Internet of Things (IoT) solutions and conduct research and development, along with projects on a partnership basis between the two entities. The collaboration will undoubtedly prove to be a turning point as Browns is focused on offering innovative industry-grade technological solutions tailored to a local context, which will be first of its kind in Sri Lanka.

The significance of the partnership will extend beyond the realms of academia and industries, by providing internships, industry-related visits and employment for undergraduates along with knowledge sharing opportunities between Browns and the University of Sri Jayewardenepura, which are some of the many benefits stemming from the MoU. The collaboration additionally intends to bridge the gap between theoretical learning and practical application. Through hands-on experience and exposure to real-world challenges, students will acquire valuable insights and gain the essential skills needed for professional growth.

The MoU between Browns and the University of Sri Jayewardenepura is not confined only to an exchange of resources. Through a pool of collective expertise, the two entities will create a synergistic environment conducive for innovation, knowledge and growth, thereby promoting Sri Lanka as a hub for innovation and technological advancement.

Upon the successful signing of the MoU, Brown & Company PLC Director/CEO Sanakan Thamotharampillai said: “We are delighted to collaborate with the University of Sri Jayewardenepura. I believe this partnership will be a door-opener to provide dynamic industry innovations with the use of Browns’ expertise and new talent from the University.”

University of Sri Jayewardenepura Dean of Faculty of Engineering Dr. Nishan Dharmaweera said: «We are deeply honoured to partner with Browns and are confident that our students will have access to excellent opportunities in the industry, enabling them to explore new areas and apply their knowledge effectively.