Sri Lanka’s broadcast authority bill to be presented to parliament soon

ECONOMYNEXT — Sri Lanka’s controversial Electronic Media Broadcasting Authority bill is expected to be presented to parliament soon, according to State Minister for Mass Media Shantha Bandara.

A national media policy has also been drafted and is currently under consideration by the cabinet of ministers for approval, Bandara told reporters on Tuesday February 13.

The state minister insisted that there would be “no hindrance to the media in this regard”.

A statement from the president’s office said significant amendments have been made to the Electronic Media Broadcasting Authority bill following majority agreement.

“The finalised bill has been submitted to the Attorney General’s Department and is anticipated to be presented to parliament for adoption in the near future,” the state minister was quoted as saying.

The bill has proved controversial, with media rights activists and opposition groups claiming it would pose a threat to media freedom in the island nation.

Critics have found issue with aspects of the bill such as an annual license renewal requirement that they claim will result in Sri Lanka’s privately owned broadcast media being subservient to the government the way state-run media has been for years.

Commenting on the financial management of state-run media, State Minister Bandara said the the ministry has held discussions with the management of both the Sri Lanka Rupavahini Corporation (SLRC) and the Sri Lanka Broadcasting Corporation (SLBC).

“In tackling today’s prominent challenge of financial management, we directed our attention towards addressing revenue and expenditure issues. Specifically, we concentrated on the 16 institutions falling under the Ministry, a significant portion of which relied on Treasury allocations. As a result, initiatives were undertaken to enhance the self-sufficiency of these entities, enabling them to operate independently.

“Particularly, in our efforts to enhance Sri Lanka Rupavahini Corporation and the Sri Lanka Broadcasting Corporation, we engaged in discussions with their management, leading to crucial decisions that have garnered positive responses,” he said.

The state-run Independent Television Network (ITN) and the Associated Newspapers Ceylon Limited (Lakehouse) have undergone significant transformations, Bandara said.

“We anticipate turning these institutions into profitable entities by next year,” he added.

A Chartered Institute of Journalists is also in the pipeline, according to Bandara, with initial work forwarded to the Attorney General’s Department. This institute aims to offer internationally recognised certification to journalists who undergo proper training, he said. (Colombo/Feb14/2024)