Boat & Marine Show Sri Lanka ninth edition concludes on high note

The ninth edition of the Boat & Marine Show organised collectively by the Chamber of Marine Industries of Sri Lanka (CMISL), Sri Lanka Export Development Board (EDB), Industry and Entrepreneurship Development Ministry was held successfully from 30 January–1 February 2026 at Port City, Colombo which showcased the country’s capabilities in marine tourism, recreational boating, yachting and boat building which are mainly focused on exports.

The EDB, in collaboration with the industry has undertaken and continues to initiate various activities aimed at developing and promoting the sector.

Among these initiatives, the Boat Show Sri Lanka, initiated in 2008 and held biennially stands out as a key promotional event. The show serves as a vital platform for industry stakeholders to showcase and market their products to potential clients, while also fostering investment opportunities in areas such as boat and shipbuilding, training, marine infrastructure, and marine tourism.

The global boat and shipbuilding industry is a multi-billion-dollar sector that plays a critical role in international trade, tourism, defence, logistics, and transportation. According to global projections, the ship and boatbuilding market is expected to grow from over $ 182 billion in 2024 to nearly $ 580 billion by 2035. This remarkable growth signals immense opportunity.

As an island nation with skilled craftsmanship, strategic location, and growing technical expertise, Sri Lanka is well positioned to capture a greater share of this expanding global market. Our boat-building industry has already demonstrated its capability in producing high-quality vessels that meet international standards, combining innovation with precision and craftsmanship.

A total of 50 leading boat building, accessory manufacturing and charter companies displayed boat and boating related products and services in 90 stalls including on water display of Boats, Catamarans etc. Also, five foreign exhibitors presented their products at the show. Exhibitors were of the view that, it was a great platform to enhance the international profile of Sri Lanka as a marine tourism destination and a manufacturing hub of high-quality boats.

The show was ceremonially inaugurated by Ports and Civil Aviation Deputy Minister Janitha Ruwan Kodituwakku and many other dignitaries.

EDB organised international buyers, Journalists from UK, Maldives, India, Singapore etc. to visit the show and organised B2B meetings with Sri Lankan Boat builders to explore future business ventures. Some of the Sri Lankan boat builders have made good business contacts with the visiting buyers for future business ties.

EDB Chairman and Chief Executive Officer Mangala Wijesinghe said: “The marine and boat-building sector has been identified as a key export contributor in the National Export Development Plan (NEDP) given its strong potential to generate foreign exchange, create skilled employment, attract investment, and enhance Sri Lanka’s global brand.”

He also said the events such as the Boat & Marine Show play a vital role in this journey. “This show provides a powerful platform to showcase Sri Lanka’s capabilities, connect local manufacturers with international buyers, promote investment opportunities, and reinforce our image as a marine tourism destination and a manufacturing hub of high-quality boats and marine products,” Wijesinghe added.

The International Conference on “Boating as a Lifestyle – Charting Sri Lanka’s Course Toward Nautical Tourism”, also organised on 31 January 2026 at Kingsbury Hotel in parallel with this exhibition, was particularly significant. The local and international speakers and panellists discussed on the topics of Charting Sri Lanka’s Course Toward a Nautical Tourism, Nautical Tourism and National Potential, The Boat-Building Industry and Investment Promotion, Gearing for Blue Economic Sustainability etc. which are timely.

It created a space for dialogue, knowledge-sharing, and policy alignment, while promoting Sri Lanka as a preferred nautical tourism destination, a sector with strong potential to increase foreign exchange earnings and generate high-value tourism experiences.