Ooh, Suzi darling…

Yes, singer Suzi Croner (Flückiger) became a darling to all her Sri Lankan fans in Melbourne, Australia, when she arrived, in that part of the world, last month, for her big event, ‘Country Night.’

Everyone, whom she met, hugged and greeted her, saying “Oh, Suzi darling, so happy to see you again!” And, Suzi says her mind went back to the days of the hit song, ‘Oh, Suzie Darling’ sung by Robin Luke.

“Believe me, I was so happy to see all my old friends again…from the Bambalapitiya Flats, Dehiwela, schoolmates, etc., and I enjoyed every minute of my stay in Melbourne,” said Suzi.

“On the last occasion I was in Australia, I fell ill and was not 100 percent fit. This time it was a different scene altogether.

“I was invited to several places – for lunch, dinner, tea, and the usual exciting outings.”

Referring to the ‘Country Night’ concert, held on Saturday, 26th October, at The Grand On Princess, Suzi said it was a huge success.

Thank you for the music. Oh Suzie Darling. Such a cheerful & fun loving lady. We enjoyed the music at the Country & Western. Was a very good night. Good Music, Food & Drinks. Well done to Bertie, too.

The action started around 6.00 pm and went on till 1.00 am., with Suzi doing three sessions of 45 minutes each, singing all country and western songs, to her own music.

“I included two baila songs, for my last set, as Sri Lankans, in any part of the world, generally like to end any event with a baila session. ‘Kandy Lamissi’ was one song.

“In fact, I invited the singer from No Limit. Mali Jay, to join me on stage for a couple of songs in the final session.”

‘Country Night’ also featured the bands No Limit and Hitch Hikers and they also contributed to an eventful evening with their music.

Suzi was involved in another event, in Melbourne, at The Walawwa.

Her final outing was a surprised party, organised by her friends, to celebrate the singer’s birthday…on 3rd November.

Suzi also mentioned that she would be back to work, in Zurich, Switzerland, where she is now based, on 8th November, adding “I’m going to be very busy during the season time.”

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.