Sri Lanka Freedom Party appoints Nimal Siripala as acting chair, CBK as advisor

ECONOMYNEXT — The crisis-riddled Sri Lanka Freedom Party (SLFP) has appointed its incumbent vice president Nimal Siripala de Silva as the party’s acting chairman, with former president and chairman Chandrika Bandaranaike Kumaratunga also serving as an advisor and observer.

The appointment was made at a politburo meeting held Monday April 08 morning after the the Colombo District Court issued an interim order last week preventing former President Maithripala Sirisena from serving as SLFP chairman.

SLFP National Organiser Duminda Dissanayake told reporters that the acting chairmanship was given to the senior-most member of the party.

“A party cannot function without a chairman, especially during a politically decisive period such as this,” he said.

Dissanayake also accused Sirisena of appointing several acting chairmen over the recent past but without giving party seniors their due.

“Seniors were cast aside and others appointed as acting chairmen. To protect the democratic nature of the SLFP and to safeguard the confidence of party members, the senior-most member of the party was selected,” he said.

“The biggest reason for the SLFP’s recent weakening was the party chairman’s capacity to make decisions independently as allowed for by the party constitution. We have appointed a committee to amend the constitution with the help of a president’s counsel. Through this we plan to establish democracy and justice within the SLFP,” he said.

Dissanayake also suggested that former president Kumaratunga, whose father and prime minister S W R D Bandaranaike founded the SLFP, had also been held back by Sirisena.

“Everyone wanted to know why Mrs Kumaratunga wasn’t made part of SLFP’s activities. That was not due to a shortcoming on her part. Our former chairman deliberately did not invite her for anything, as an advisor to the party. We have decided to have her as an advisor and an observer on the politburo,” he said.

“When everyone asked me to run for president in 2015, I said no and brought in the SLFP general secretary, with great expectations. He ruined the country and the party too. That mistake was corrected today,” she said.

She added that the party constitution is a mess, which she attributed to Sirisena’s actions as SLFP chairman.