Sri Lanka prime minister says presidential election still scheduled for 2024

ECONOMYNEXT — Sri Lanka’s government had not discussed at any point the postponement of the presidential election, Prime Minister Dinesh Gunawardena said, dismissing a controversial proposal by the United National Party (UNP) as “irresponsible”.

Speaking to reporters on Wednesday May 29, Gunawardena said the date for the presidential election are for 2024 and that the constitution provides for the election commission to call elections.

“According to the constitution, it is the election commission that has the power to call a presidential election within the due dates. It cannot be called early or later. The provisions are there in the constitution,” he said.

Responding to questions on safeguarding democracy, the prime minister said the government had in fact restored democracy.

“We have restored democracy since the night it was destroyed,” he said.

“A group that came to shut down and destroy parliament were chased away and a multi-party government was established. Do not forget that. That was done for democracy,” he added.

Gunawardena said the current parliament can continue till August 2025.

“If needed they can go home early. Or they can declare themselves that they want to go home. There is a system to do that,” he said.

Parliamentary, provincial and local government elections will all follow the presidential election, according to Gunawardena.

“What anyone says without responsibility, something that was not discussed at the government at any moment, hurriedly expressed to get the country worked up will not be allowed in a democratic government and parliament,” he said.

The prime minister was referrering to a statement made by UNP general secretary Palitha Range Bandara earlier Tuesday morning, callig for a referendum to postpone both presidential and parliamentary elections by two years to extend President Wickremesinghe’s term to continue ongoing economic reforms.

Labour Minister Manusha Nanayakkara also distanced himsel from the UNP general secretary’s statement.

Sri Lanka govt distances itself from UNP call for postponing electionsSee more