Virtusa: Engineering with purpose for better tomorrow

Sustainability is an ongoing journey, where every modest action contributes to a larger collective impact. Combined efforts have the potential to drive meaningful change. The pressing challenges of climate change, biodiversity loss, and the strain on planetary resources underscore the urgency to not only rethink, but also accelerate actions. This calls for enterprise leaders to adopt a deliberate approach in shaping a vision for the future—leveraging opportunities presented by emerging technologies like generative AI while embedding sustainable practices at the core of strategies.

One company who is up for the challenge is Virtusa, who believes technology and human ingenuity can solve society’s most urgent challenges. In that spirit, they embarked on a transformational corporate sustainability journey in 2010. Since then, they have made great strides toward commitments to environmental sustainability, building more equitable communities, and creating inclusive opportunities. Their sustainability initiatives aim to reduce the environmental footprint and demonstrate ethical maturity and respect for all and have earned them an EcoVadis gold ratings assessment and a score of A- for their CDP climate change repose.

Most recently, they achieved Science Based Targets initiative (SBTi) validation for greenhouse gas emissions reduction targets. Setting a science-based emissions reduction target helps companies develop a greenhouse gas reduction plan that provides a credible path to achieve net-zero emissions. The commitment to SBTi criteria signals dedication to establishing company-wide emissions reduction targets that are measurable for both Virtusa and their clients. Virtusa employs a comprehensive 360-degree strategy, ensuring sustainability is embedded internally, extends to vendors and suppliers, engages various other stakeholders (such as campuses and educational institutions, communities, etc.), and supports their clients through a consultative approach and sustainability services. It encourages long-term thinking and promotes a mindset that considers the consequences of current and future actions and decisions – a mindset that Virtusa calls “Engineering First”.

Beyond their commitment to environmental sustainability, they are also deeply invested in the communities where they work and live. Whether it’s restoring water bodies, supporting reforestation projects or supporting schools and hospitals in communities that need them the most, Virtusa strives to create meaningful progress by using their talent and engineering mindset to drive change. As part of their corporate social responsibility efforts, Virtusa is proud to play a pivotal role in the revival of Sri Lanka’s mangrove ecosystems, a project now recognised globally as the “United Nations World Flagship for Restoration”. By leveraging science-based methods and fostering collaboration among diverse stakeholders, they’ve contributed significantly to this cause.

Virtusa’s global team is spread across 25 countries and 40 locations, creating a dynamic community that embraces various cultures. They are progressing towards 58% supplier diversity and 40% women representation in their workforce by FY26. They were recently recognised as a Great Place to Work® in eight countries: India, Sri Lanka, the US, the UK, Canada, the UAE, Singapore, and Australia.