Sri Lanka, Japan discuss resuming stalled projects under yen loans

ECONOMYNEXT – Sri Lanka and Japan have discussed resuming suspended projects under yen loans, its foreign minister said.

“We also addressed the resumption of suspended projects under yen loans, with a commitment to expedite the necessary formalities,” M U M Ali Sabry said on X (twitter).

“Additionally, we discussed opportunities for increasing Japanese investment in Sri Lanka and expanding employment prospects for Sri Lankans in Japan across various sectors.”

Sabry is currently in Tokyo, Japan where he met Foreign Minister of Japan Kamikawa Yoko to improve bilateral relations.

“We explored various avenues to deepen cooperation across multiple dimensions and expressed our gratitude to Japan for its leadership as a co-chair of the OCC in facilitating the bilateral debt restructuring process.”

Diplomatic ties between Japan and Sri Lanka hit a low after former president Gotabaya Rajapaksa unilaterally cancelled a Japan International Cooperation Agency (JICA)-funded, $1.5 billion railway project.

The then government which was closer to Beijing, also cancelled another $500 million tripartite deal to develop the Colombo Port’s Eastern Container Terminal (ETC) together with India.

Japan halted all its yen loan funded projects after Sri Lanka defaulted, as its lending agency is barred from increasing loans to a country in debt distress.

But it gave grants to help over the crisis and facilitated discussions to speed up bilateral debt restructuring.

Sri Lanka President Ranil Wickremesinghe apologized to the Japanese government for the unilateral cancellation of the Japan-funded light rail transit (LRT) project when he visited Japan in May last year. Wickremesinghe is seen as a pro-Japanese leader.

During Sabry’s visit, the two historically friendly countries reaffirmed their dedication to working together to promote peace and stability in the region and beyond, Sabry said. “We agreed to maintain this dialogue to further strengthen our already excellent relationship.”

Sabry also met the Justice Minister of Japan Ryuji Koizumi and sought Japan’s support in digitalizing and upgrading Sri Lanka’s judicial administration to address law delays. Sabry held the post of Justice Minister previously.(Colombo/Jul3/2024)