LK Domain Registry marks 35 years of digital innovation in Sri Lanka

A majority of 62% choose .LK to host their website and business services, reinforcing the position of the LK Domain Registry as the preferred choice for businesses and individuals across the country, according to the Registry.

Established in 1990, the LK Domain Registry has served the country by providing a dependable domain registration service and facilitating development of Internet infrastructure to improve the Internet in Sri Lanka. As the national-level domain name, a “.lk” domain provides Sri Lankan organisations and individuals with their unique brand identity on the Internet. It registers a wide range of domain names including the top-level domains .lk, .com.lk, .org.lk, .edu.lk, and .web.lk. In addition to English, domain names can also be registered in the Sinhala and Tamil language top-level domains .ලංකා and .இலங்கை.

LK Domain Registry CEO and Domain Registrar Prof. Gihan Dias said: “Today, .LK reaches 62% of Sri Lanka’s domain name market, reflecting the trust businesses and individuals place in our national domain. We are also seeing growing adoption of .LK among overseas individuals and international organisations seeking a strong, credible digital connection. Our focus remains on strengthening .LK as a trusted and globally recognised digital identity.”

During the past 35 years, LK Domain Registry has commenced several key national-level initiatives to empower Sri Lankans through digital inclusion. Back in 2006, it launched TechCERT – Sri Lanka’s first and largest Computer Emergency Readiness Team – as a pioneering project together with its academic partners to provide a safety net for large and small organisations against cyber-attacks and emergency situations. Since 2009, LK Domain Registry has unveiled a host of social empowerment initiatives, equipping over 55,000 students, teachers, and principals across Sri Lanka with up-to-date ICT knowledge and skills. Its interactive e-learning platform, SuhuruSara, has empowered more than 20,000 learners through courses in web design, programming, and multimedia – delivered in local languages to broaden academic and career opportunities. Hithawathi, the cyber safety awareness program, has empowered over 7.5 million netizens with vital cyber safety skills, equipping them to navigate the digital world safely and confidently. It has also supported more than 14,500 individuals facing cyber-related challenges, making it a trusted lifeline in Sri Lanka’s digital safety landscape. Cyber Lowata Piyapath stands out as an initiative which empowered 1,649 schools across 67 education zones to build their own websites, and equipped over 18,000 students and 2,100 teachers with essential digital literacy skills to thrive in the digital age.

LK Domain Registry’s most recent initiative is FOUNDATION.LK, a not-for-profit initiative dedicated to empowering Sri Lankans with the knowledge, skills, and resources to navigate cyberspace safely and confidently – promoting responsible digital citizenship and unlocking opportunities in the evolving digital landscape.