SLC to fund cancer awareness with every six, boundary & wicket during LPL

Sri Lanka Cricket (SLC) has commenced donating funds to raise awareness on ‘Breast Cancer’ in the country with the Lanka Premier League’s ‘Pink Day’ campaign.

Accordingly, every time a batsman hits a six, a boundary, or takes a wicket, Sri Lanka Cricket will donate funds to the worthy cause, SLC said in a statement.

Accordingly, a ‘Six’ will contribute Rs. 10,000 for the fund; a boundary will boost the fund by Rs. 4,000; and a wicket will strengthen it by Rs. 6,000.

Sri Lanka Cricket will continue this campaign until the last ball of Lanka Premier League 2024 is bowled on July 21, 2024, in the finals of the competition, the statement added.

This initiative is launched in line with the Lanka Premier League 2024 ‘Pink Day’ Campaign on Sunday (July 14) to help raise awareness on ‘Breast Cancer’, it added.

The campaign titled “Strike with Hope: LPL Goes Pink for Breast Cancer Awareness’, will see all the players and supporters wearing ‘Pink’ colored clothing to support the cause.

“Sri Lanka Cricket, apart from cricket, in every LPL edition focuses on contributing to a worthy cause, and this year, we are focusing on creating awareness on ‘Breast Cancer,’ a move towards empowering women,” said Mr. Samantha Dodanwela, Tournament Director of Lanka Premier League.

An initiative of the Dambulla Sixers, ‘Pink Day, will see its players wearing pink jerseys with a pink ribbon to help promote breast cancer awareness and encourage self-breast examinations, according to SLC.

Joining the cause will be the Galle Marvels, who will wear a special jersey combining pink with their usual neon green during the match, while Jaffna Kings players will wear a ‘Pink Bow’ to mark the occasion, and the Colombo Strikers too will make their presence in the campaign with pink.

Kandy Falcons, even though they are not playing a game on July 14, will arrive in the stadium with pink-colored clothing to support the cause, it added.

Accordingly, the LPL invites spectators arriving at the ground to join the ‘Pink Day’ campaign by wearing pink.