Sri Lanka CB chief cites debt repayment for slow reserve accumulation

ECONOMYNEXT – Sri Lanka’s sluggish foreign reserve accumulation is due to external debt and swap repayments amid delays into some government capital investment projects linked to foreign funds, Central Bank Governor Nandalal Weerasinghe said.

Despite the Central Bank has been a strong net buyer of US dollars from the market, the island nation’s gross reserves has edged up by only USD 100 million to USD 6.2 billion in the first eight months of this year from end-December’s 6.1 billion.

“That’s mainly because of the debt service payments. If you look at the debt service payments this year, even after completing the debt restructuring we started repaying at least the interest and some of the external payments for ADB, World Bank continued,” Governor Weerasinghe told reporters on Wednesday at the Central Bank’s post-Monetary Policy Review media briefing.

“In addition, there is another central bank debt service also. For example, now we had this 2.6 billion swap with RBI (Reserve Bank of India). We are in the process of repaying that also,” he said.

He said the government also settled short term trade credit from India borrowed during the crisis time in 2022.

“As a result, there were some relatively high foreign currency debt services for the government. Debt service payments are already fixed. Our central bank obligations to service state, as well as government obligations are going through our reserves.”

The government has allocated over Rs1300 billion for capital investment this year, but only less that quarter of this money is used due to delay in the procurement process and the full year budget.

“Inflow for the government is whatever they get from ADB, World Bank, IMF, and other partners. There’s a delay in getting some of the inflows. Once you get the other inflows in, we can see the improvement going forward” he said.

Weerasinghe, however, said despite all the debt service payments, still reserve level is stable and gradually increasing. (Colombo/September 25/2025)