Delmege – Sri Lanka excels at Kellogg’s Asia Expansion Markets Meet 2024

Vallibel One/Delmege Managing Director Dinusha Bhaskaran (seventh from left) and  team from Delmege Consumer with award presented by Kellogg’s

Wins prestigious ‘Best Country’ and ‘Best General Trade’ awards at awards ceremony held in Kathmandu

At the highly anticipated Kellogg’s Asia Expansion Markets Annual Meet 2024, held in Kathmandu, Delmege took centre stage by winning two of the most coveted awards – the ‘Best Country’ and ‘Best General Trade’ awards which were received by Vallibel One/Delmege Ltd. Managing Director Dinusha Bhaskaran. This remarkable achievement underscores Delmege’s exceptional performance and commitment to excellence in the global business arena.

The Best Country award recognises the nation’s outstanding acceptance, trust and confidence in the prestigious Kellogg’s brand. The unwavering importance, prime focus and strategic market initiatives undertaken for the entire product range, ensuring continued growth, successful market penetration, and consistent delivery of results across various key sectors earned Delmege this prestigious honour.

Additionally, the Best GT award, which celebrates excellence in general trade performance, was bestowed upon Delmege for its effective and widely penetrative sales and distribution strategies, as well as its strong partnerships with retailers. This award highlights Delmege’s significant role in driving Kellogg’s success in the general trade segment driven by a highly motivated, dynamic and customer focused sales team deployed by Delmege Consumer.

Delmege Consumer Director – Sales I. M. Khan said: “This accolade emphasises Delmege’s leadership in the region, bolstered by a dedicated team that consistently goes above and beyond to deliver exceptional results. The success reflects Delmege’s dynamic approach to business, as well as the continued trust and collaboration between Kellogg’s and Delmege Forsyth co. Ltd. as the local partner.”

Vallibel One/Delmege Ltd., Managing Director Dinusha Bhaskaran said: “The Kellogg’s AEM Annual Meet 2024 was a celebration of achievements across the region, and Delmege’s recognition as both Best Country and the Best in General Trade demonstrates the vital role played by Delmege in the broader success of the Kellogg’s brand in Sri Lanka. We are immensely proud of this recognition and remain focused on driving growth and delivering exceptional value to our partners.”

Delmege Consumer said as it celebrates this achievement, it remains focused on its mission to redefine the standards of excellence in the FMCG industry, paving the way for continued success and leadership.