Sri Lanka going ahead ISB deal to avoid bigger problems from delay: Foreign Minister

ECONOMYNEXT – Sri Lanka’s new administration decided to go ahead with a restructure deal reached with sovereign bondholders before the presidential election to avoid bigger economic problems from a delay, Foreign Minister Vijitha Herath said.

“We as a government did not change the process especially on ISBs,” Foreign Minister Vijitha Herath told reporters after this week’s cabinet meeting.

“We intervened to take the process forward without breaking it down.

“If we stopped it and then checked whether it was correct or not, it will take a very long time, the economy would have to face big problems.”

Sri Lanka reached an in-principle deal with sovereign bondholders which was in line with International Monetary Fund’s debt sustainability analysis.

Sri Lanka is regarded as country in default until the debt is restructured. A court case has also been filed in the US by some bondholders.

Though bondholders took coupon haircuts of reducing coupons to 3.1 percent to 3.35 percent on bonds on a 27 percent haircut, there has been complaint over hair cut reversals and steep rises in yields especially after 2033 which are linked to gross domestic product growth.

From the time of the default about 1.8 billion dollars of coupons interest has accumulated.

The in principle deal also contains two bonds maturing in 2034 and 2035, where the coupon can fall based on governance indicators. These could include fiscal other targets that could be negotiated with bondholders.

Sri Lanka defaulted on its sovereign bonds after macro-economists cut rates and also taxes and printed large amounts of money to stop interest rates from going up triggering forex shortages and loss of external confidence in the currency and debt.

Countries like Argentina started to default on commercial debt (initially bank debt) from around 1980 after the IMF’s second amendment left them without a credible anchor for money, despite fiscal metrics far better than Sri Lanka before the currency cum banking crisis started.

Argentina’s external debt was less than 30 percent of GDP when the currency collapsed in 1980 and its serial defaults started.

Argentina’s BCRA which is the archetypical sterilizing central bank and other Latin American countries started to default serially from around the 1980s.

The proximate cause of recent defaults had been unwillingness to roll-over BCRA to roll-over its sterilizing securities (leliqs) at market rates analysts who follow the country say. Each failed of leliq auction leads to liquidity being injected.

Sri Lanka started to go into serial currency crises especially after 2015 without a war after the IMF taught macro-economists to calculate potential output encouraging money printing to try and boost growth.

Money was also printed to boost inflation under so-called flexible inflation targeting, triggering forex shortages and a frenzy of foreign borrowing including syndicated loans from China as well as sovereign bonds.

Sri Lanka’s central bank sterilizes interventions in the forex market, printing large volumes of money to keep down interest rates (targeting a mid-corridor rate especially from 2015).