Chinese research vessel in Sri Lankan EEZ despite moratorium

COLOMBO (News 1st); A Chinese research ship, which was denied permission to enter the Exclusive Economic Zone of the Sea of Sri Lanka, is currently engaged in research within the said zone.

At the same time, a battle submarine belonging to the Indian Navy approached Colombo on Saturday while the Chinese ship was engaged in research activity.

The Chinese Research / Survery Vessel  Xiang Yang Hong 3 is officially owned by the Third Institute of Oceanology, of the Chinese Ministry of Natural Resources.

Following the Sri Lankan government's decision to decline permission for marine biology research in its exclusive economic zone, the Chinese research vessel 'Xiang Yang Hong 3' has diverted to the Maldives for logistical support.

The vessel is currently conducting marine geophysical surveys in the southwestern waters of Sri Lanka.

An analysis of data systems and platforms for maritime vessel tracking, suggests that the research vessel 'Xiang Yang Hong 3' was present within the Sri Lankan Exclusive Economic Zone or the Sea of Sri Lanka.

The Chinese Embassy had previously submitted a request for Sri Lankan approval to conduct marine biology research activities between January 5th and February 20th, 2024.

India had expressed concerns about the research activities. Ultimately, Sri Lanka decided not to grant permission to any foreign research vessel to operate in its waters, citing various factors in its decision.

The Ministry of Foreign Affairs later announced that Sri Lanka has implemented a one-year moratorium on foreign research vessels entering its waters.

Despite these events, The Xiang Yang Hong 3, a Chinese research vessel, is currently located outside Sri Lankan territorial waters but within the country's Exclusive Economic Zone (EEZ).

Notably, over 17 Chinese research vessels have operated in Sri Lankan waters in the past few years, with some visits approved by Sri Lankan authorities.

Previously, the Xiang Yang Hong 3 visited Sri Lanka twice, most recently on 13th December 2017 with Sri Lankan permission.

INS 'Karanj' – a submarine of the Indian Navy arrived at the port of Colombo on Saturday (3) on a formal visit.

Indian reports said that Indian Navy’s submarine INS Karanj was dispatched to Sri Lanka to conincide with the island nation's Indepdence Day.

According to the Hindustan Times, Sri Lanka welcoming the Indian Navy submarine INS Karanj after shutting its ports to Chinese submarine and research vessel marks a diplomatic win for India amid a tiff over China's maritime movement in the Indian Ocean Region (IOR).

It added that the Indian Submarine visited Sri Lanka to participate in a submarine awareness program.

The report said that the Indian Submarine was sent to one of Lanka's main ports to convey a message to Beijing and Male as Chinese spy ship Xiang Yang Hong 3 continues to sail towards the Maldives.

It added that the move was aimed at highlighting India’s role as the primary security provider in the Indian Ocean Region.