Sri Lanka in talks with India to establish multi product oil pipeline

ECONOMYNEXT – Sri Lanka is in talks with India to establish a multi product oil pipeline connecting Nagapattnam, Trincomalee Tank Farm and Colombo, its Energy Minister said.

“On the sidelines of the India Energy week I had a meeting with the Indian Oil yesterday. We discussed the proposal by the Indian Government through IOC for a multi product oil pipeline connecting Nagapattnam, Trincomalee Tank Farm and Colombo,” Minister of Power and Energy Kanchana Wijesekera said on his social media platform.

“Technical studies, demand market analysis, financial analysis and business models will be conducted to decide on the mechanism. We also discussed about the investments and expansion of projects under the joint venture in Trincomalee tank farm, CPSTL and LIOC retail operations.”

Wijesekera is in India to participate at the 2nd edition of the India Energy Week held on February 6-7, on the invitation of the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas of India.

“At the bilateral meetings held with Hardeep S Puri the Minister of Petroleum and Natural Gas of India, we focused and discussed on the ongoing energy projects with the assistance of the Indian Govt, Indian Investments and energy policy on future developments.

“Among the topics discussed was LNG supply, Oil Pipeline connectivity, Oil and Gas Exploration, LIOC operations, Trincomalee Tank Farm development & sustainable energy generation plans.”

On the sidelines of the India Energy week I had a meeting with the @IndianOilcl yesterday. We discussed the proposal by the Indian Government through IOC for a multi product oil pipeline connecting Nagapattnam, Trincomalee Tank Farm & Colombo.

Wijesekera said chairpersons of India Oil Company, Lanka India Oil Company, Ceylon Petroleum Corporation, and Petroleum Development Authority of Sri Lanka participated in the discussions.

Wijesekera also visited the facilities of the Oil and Natural Gas Corporation (ONGC) in Goa. “The training facilities at ONGC provide modern training and safety tools to energy companies.

“Use of robotics and drones for fire combating in refineries, oil rigs, petroleum storage facilities and logistics operations will ensure a safer environment for the employees and minimize the risk of fire damage. I was joined by the Chairman of CPC and Petroleum Development Authority for the visit.” (Colombo/Feb9/2024)