ISF launches world’s first fully automated coconut de-watering system

Science and Technology Minister Prof. Chrishantha Abeysena (second from left) inspects the world’s first fully automated coconut de-watering system along with ISF Director Anjula Sivakumaran (left) and other invitees

From Left: ISF CEO Raveenthiran, Director Anjula Sivakumaran, Automation and Digital Solutions Deputy General Manager Danushka Kamaradiwala, Designs, Sales and Marketing General Manager Nalidra Menake Hettiarachchi

I am proud to have designed, tested and launched this automated coconut de-watering system. My clients in Indonesia and the Philippines are delighted with this innovation, and this particular machine will be shipped to the Philippines in a few weeks. We continue to develop technologies across the entire coconut processing value chain, including dehusking, deshelling, and paring. This forms part of my vision to help regional and local firms to automate their operations so that they can compete globally

Sri Lankan engineering and technology company ISF, with bold ambitions in manufacturing artificial intelligence (AI), last week launched the world’s first fully automated coconut de-watering system.

The system improves productivity, reduces labour dependency, and addresses operational inefficiencies across the coconut processing industry, while improving return on investment.

Designed and manufactured in Sri Lanka by local engineers, the system automates a process that has traditionally relied on manual handling.

The system was unveiled through a live demonstration attended by Science and Technology Minister Prof. Chrishantha Abeysena, diplomats representing ISF’s key international markets, industry leaders, and members of the media. Participants were given the opportunity to observe the technology in operation and understand the key benefits it offers to coconut processors.

ISF Director Anjula Sivakumaran said: “I am proud to have designed, tested and launched this automated coconut de-watering system. My clients in Indonesia and the Philippines are delighted with this innovation, and this particular machine will be shipped to the Philippines in a few weeks. My team of engineers will be travelling there to oversee the installation and provide after-sales support.”

“This forms part of my vision to help regional and local firms to automate their operations so that they can compete globally. I also want to realise this vision by leveraging Sri Lanka’s outstanding engineering talent. In doing so, we will help customers achieve their commercial goals through a very short return on investment. What ISF does extends beyond coconut de-watering,” Sivakumaran added.

“We continue to develop technologies across the entire coconut processing value chain, including dehusking, deshelling, and paring. By combining engineering expertise, automation, and AI, I aim to create solutions that solve difficult business problems. I am proud that we continue to invest in pioneering technologies through extensive research and development, while working closely with our global partners,” she said.

Established in 1977, ISF has evolved from a manufacturing company into a provider of complete technology, engineering, automation, and process solutions serving the dairy, coconut, food, pharmaceutical, chemical, and fast-moving consumer good (FMCG) industries.

“It’s a new world,” Sivakumaran said. “My goal is to help transform companies in Sri Lanka and across the region to global standards at a fraction of the cost charged by Western technology companies.”