Fuss about maid’s house and lingering imbroglio

Whenever the JVP-NPP government gets into hot water, President Anura Kumara Dissanayake rushes to Parliament and makes special statements; the CID and the national anti-graft commission try to pull a rabbit out of the hat to distract the public. While the government is drawing heavy flak for mismanaging the current fuel quota system, with long queues of vehicles persisting near filling stations, the Commission to Investigate Allegations of Bribery or Corruption has recorded a statement from former President Gotabaya Rajapaksa on an allegation that during President Mahinda Rajapaksa’s government, he, as the Secretary to the Ministry of Urban Development, had a house allocated to a maid of the then Chief Justice (CJ) Mohan Peiris, in an Urban Development Authority housing scheme.

There is no gainsaying that an investigation needs to be conducted to find out whether there were irregularities in the allocation of the aforesaid house and the state suffered any losses therefrom, but there are far bigger issues that need to be addressed. The Rajapaksa government earned notoriety for cronyism, corruption, misuse of state assets, etc., but most of its questionable deals have not been probed. Similarly, the destruction of hundreds of state-owned buildings by the JVP in the late 1980s has gone uninvestigated despite the staggering losses those crimes caused to the state coffers. Maithripala Sirisena, whom the JVP helped secure the executive presidency in 2015, once revealed that the JVP had torched as many as 240 Agrarian Service Centres with paddy storage facilities countrywide during its second reign of terror (1987-89). Now that action has reportedly been taken to reinvestigate crimes, such as abductions, torture and extrajudicial killings in the Batalanda torture chamber in the late 1980s, why the arson attacks on the Agrarian Service Centres, more than 700 state-owned buses, about 14 trains, countless transformers, etc., have not been probed defies comprehension. They were clear violations of the Offences against Public Property Act and must be investigated.

Let the focus now shift from the maid’s house to her employer, Peiris, and some unresolved issues concerning his tenure as the head of the judiciary. One of the first few things that the UNP-led Yahapalana government did after the 2015 regime change was to remove Peiris as CJ. President Sirisena declared the appointment of Peiris as CJ null and void ab initio, and reinstated Dr. Shirani Bandaranayake, claiming that her impeachment had no legal validity. Interestingly, Sirisena himself had spoken and voted in favour of her ‘impeachment’ as a minister in the Rajapaksa government in 2013. Dr. Bandaranayake retired soon after her reinstatement, and Sri Lanka had three CJs on three consecutive days—Peiris, Bandaranayake and her successor K. Sripavan!

Strangely, the Yahapalana government, which claimed that Peiris had functioned as the CJ ‘unlawfully’, stopped short of taking any action against him for having held that position for two years. If it is true that Peiris’ appointment was invalid, as Sirisena and the UNP claimed, then it follows that everything he did as the CJ was unlawful. Peiris drew the CJ’s salary, enjoyed the perks of office, functioned as the Chairman of the Judges’ Institute of Sri Lanka, heard cases, gave judgments and signed vital documents and perhaps even cheques. Why didn’t the Yahapalana government take any action against Peiris and/or the person who appointed him CJ ‘unlawfully’? Sirisena and his erstwhile Yahapalana chums owe an explanation. Shouldn’t the JVP-NPP government probe these issues as well? In fact, it is duty bound to do so because the JVP was an ally of the Yahapalana government.

The UNP’s arguments against the ‘impeachment’ of CJ Bandaranayake were tenable and compelling. The Parliamentary Select Committee, which probed her, was biased; it allegedly refused to allow some witnesses to testify and failed to specify what the due process was. Most of all, the UNP said the resolution passed in a hurry to impeach CJ Bandaranayake had not specifically sought parliamentary approval for her removal. However, if the impeachment process had been flawed, as argued by the UNP and some legal experts, a proper way to right the wrong would have been for President Sirisena to have Parliament undo what it had done. The Yahapalana government, which mustered a two-thirds majority for the 19th Amendment, could have accomplished that task easily. Instead, President Sirisena chose to override Parliament. Sadly, the Bar Association of Sri Lanka egged him on to do what he did, unmindful of the politico-legal consequences of his arbitrary action. The unresolved constitutional imbroglio that arose from glaring violations of due process, high-handed executive action, etc., is certainly far more serious than the allocation of a house for Peiris’ maid and therefore needs to be addressed urgently.

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.