‘Good politics’ could derail SL’s critical economic reforms – Emeritus Prof. Sirimevan Colombage

Sri Lanka’s economic recovery hangs in the balance as politics threatens to derail critical reforms, well known economist Emeritus Prof. Sirimevan Colombage warns.

Speaking at the launch of the book ‘Reforming Macroeconomic Policies for Stability and Growth: Sri Lanka’s Road to Economic Recovery’ at the Lakshman Kadirgamar Institute, Colombo 07 recently, Emeritus Professor Colombage of the Open University of Sri Lanka stressed the importance of prioritizing sound economic management over political agendas.

According to him, Sri Lanka must focus on reducing the fiscal deficit and encourage foreign investment to achieve long-term economic growth and stability.

Colombage added: ‘Sri Lanka’s economy must be prepared to service its debt repayments by 2028. With a projected growth rate of three per cent in the medium term, this figure is insufficient to significantly reduce unemployment or poverty.

‘It is essential to cut the fiscal deficit to reduce pressure on the domestic capital market and provide financial resources to the private sector, especially in boosting exports. A robust recovery package, is critical to improving the country’s global credit rankings and attracting Foreign Direct Investment (FDI).

‘The IMF’s Extended Fund Facility (EFF) is a key component in reviving the economy. It offers Sri Lanka much-needed “breathing space” to pursue debt restructuring and improve the country’s international image.

‘However, I doubt the existence of the political will to maintain the program, especially in light of the upcoming presidential elections.

‘Sri Lanka’s economic crisis stemmed from years of imprudent macroeconomic policies, particularly between 2019 and 2022, when ill-conceived policy decisions deepened existing imbalances.

‘The 2019 tax cuts, money printing and fixed exchange rates were major triggers for the crisis, resulting in high inflation, capital outflows and a foreign exchange shortage. As a result, Sri Lanka’s debt now stands at 116% of its GDP, with external debt reaching USD 43.3 billion.

‘With the presidential election looming, politically- motivated fiscal policies could jeopardize the country’s recovery. Various candidates have proposed salary hikes and other populist measures, which could undermine fiscal consolidation efforts.

‘Such promises may help win votes but will ultimately fuel inflation and deepen the country’s economic woes.

‘Sri Lanka has a history of “stop-go” economic reforms, where initiatives are often abandoned midway for political reasons.

‘The same fate could befall the current recovery plan. “Good politics is often bad economics.” ‘

‘The Expert Committee on Public Service Salary Disparities recommended an increase in the basic salary of public servants by 24% to over 50% from next January. It is reported that the President has endorsed the proposed salary increase. Other presidential candidates too have followed suit, offering similar or higher salary hikes. This is good politics and bad economics.

‘While such a salary hike may be justifiable to compensate for the rise in cost of living, it is questionable whether the so-called Expert Committee considered its adverse effects on government expenditure, fiscal deficit and more importantly on the macroeconomic policy reforms under the IMF-EFF program. The proposed salary hike, if implemented, would be a discretionary decision that is likely to create pro-cyclical effects, aggravating the economic crisis.

‘Reduction of the fiscal deficit to GDP ratio from around eight percent at present to five percent in 2025 and to 4.2 by 2028 is a major policy target of the recovery package.

‘The proposed salary increase will jeopardise the fiscal consolidation, causing a significant rise in the fiscal deficit to GDP ratio from 2025 onwards.

‘In 2023, the public sector salary bill amounted to Rs. 940 billion. A minimum 24% salary increase, as suggested by the Expert Committee, will incur an additional cost of around Rs. 225 billion to the government.’

Mastercard and Bank of Ceylon collaborate to launch Sri Lanka’s first medical tourism card

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.