Lassana greetings from BIA

Lassana Flora elevates airport greetings with country’s first-ever arrival terminal floral outlet

Miss World Sri Lanka 2024 Anudi Gunasekara opens the Lassana Flora outlet at BIA as Guest of Honour

Lassana Flora, Sri Lanka’s premier florist and greenhouse agri-producer, launched the first floral outlet at the Bandaranaike International Airport (BIA); strategically located within the arrival terminal. The venture offers a thoughtful and convenient way for visitors to greet incoming travellers with a fresh, vibrant bouquet, adding a profound touch of warmth and appreciation.

The new Lassana Flora outlet at BIA’s arrival lounge presents an exquisite selection of fresh flowers and expertly crafted bouquets, thoughtfully priced to be accessible to all. For those desiring a personalised touch, customised bouquets can be conveniently pre-ordered online via the company website – lassasna.com – and the dedicated hotline to ensure a truly unique welcome. A diverse range of standard floral arrangements are also available for both pre-booking and immediate purchase around-the-clock directly at the BIA outlet.

The boutique at the BIA was ceremonially launched before distinguished guests that included Chief Guest, Airport and Aviation Services of Sri Lanka Chairman, Air Chief Marshall Harsha Abeywickrema, and Guest of Honour, Miss World Sri Lanka 2024 Anudi Gunasekera.

Lassana Flora Chairman/Managing Director Dr. Lasantha Malavige said: “We are incredibly proud to open BIA’s first-ever floral outlet right here at the arrival terminal. We understand that an airport is a place of profound emotional connection, where families and friends joyfully reunite. Our mission is to enhance these cherished moments by offering the simple yet heartfelt joy of gifting a beautiful bouquet, allowing loved ones to express their affection and welcome travellers home in the most heartwarming way.”

Miss World Sri Lanka 2024 Anudi Gunasekara, who graced the occasion as Guest of Honour said: “An airport is where we constantly express love and admiration for our loved ones, and what better way to celebrate them than with flowers. The BIA truly needed Lassana Flora to make it a ‘Lassana’ (beautiful) place. I am delighted to be a part of celebrating Lassana through this wonderful initiative.”