ADB approves financing for rooftop solar and virtual net metering to boost clean energy access in Sri Lanka

The Asian Development Bank (ADB) has approved a US $ 57.4 million financing package to help Sri Lanka expand access to affordable clean energy and reduce greenhouse gas emissions through rooftop solar aggregation and virtual net metering.

The financing consists of a US $ 35 million concessional loan, grants of US $ 16.9 million from the European Union and US $ 5.5 million from the Japan Fund for the Joint Crediting Mechanism and counterpart funding from the implementing agencies, bringing the total estimated project cost to

The Rooftop Solar Aggregation and Virtual Net Metering Project will help two government-owned power utilities, Electricity Distribution Lanka (Private) Limited and Lanka Electricity Company (Private) Limited, to establish a scalable, utility-led model that pools electricity from large rooftop solar systems and virtually distributes credits to the eligible consumers. This allows multiple users to share the benefits of solar energy without installing panels on their homes.

“This project will help Sri Lanka widen access to affordable renewable energy while strengthening grid readiness for a more resilient and inclusive power sector,” said ADB Country Director for Sri Lanka Shannon Cowlin.

“It will support small businesses, advance grid modernisation and digitalisation and create new opportunities for women and young people in the clean energy industry.”

The project is designed to help eligible micro, small and medium enterprises as well as community organisations—including those unable to install rooftop solar because of financial or space constraints—to reduce the electricity costs through allocations under a social compensation mechanism.

Approximately 25 megawatt-peak of rooftop solar installations will be supported by the financing. It will also support a new aggregation and virtual net metering model, modernise and digitalise the distribution networks of the two utilities and help build a grid ready for more distributed renewable energy.

A training facility to support green skills development will be set up, women’s participation in the sector strengthened and more capacity built on advanced low-carbon technologies.

The ADB is a leading multilateral development bank supporting sustainable, inclusive and resilient growth across Asia and the Pacific. Working with its members and partners to solve complex challenges together, the ADB harnesses innovative financial tools and strategic partnerships to transform lives, build quality infrastructure and safeguard our planet. Founded in 1966, the ADB is owned by 69 members—50