Zellers crowns Sri Lanka’s first AI Avurudu Kumara and Kumariya

Zellers crowned Sri Lanka’s very first AI Avurudu Kumara and Kumariya recently, by creating a unique event blended with tradition and technology to redefine Avurudu celebrations.

Zellers invited Sri Lankans to generate their own AI Avurudu Kumara or Kumariya by selecting their favourite Zellers centre-filled chocolates, drawing creative inspiration from the brand’s rich and indulgent range. Zellers fans responded enthusiastically and what began as a creative challenge quickly became a cultural moment, with over 450 entries sent from across the country.

A public voting round narrowed the field to the top 10 Kumaras and top 10 Kumariyas. With the aim of making the final stage even more captivating, Zellers went beyond using mere static photos by ensuring that every finalist was animated and brought to life on Facebook, turning the competition into an immersive digital experience that attracted thousands of viewers.

The campaign peaked with a two-hour live voting finale that drew real-time engagement from fans islandwide as they watched this groundbreaking event unfold. Once the final votes were counted, Contestant 116 (Anji) was crowned the Zellers AI Avurudu Kumara, and Contestant 377 (Ivory Cocoa) took the Kumariya title and a host of attractive prizes.

Expressing his views on this unique experience, the Zellers team commented, “Zellers has consistently delivered creative campaigns that connect with Sri Lankan audiences through innovation and storytelling. This first-of-its-kind AI-powered Avurudu competition demonstrated to all how we can reimagine cultural traditions using the power of modern tools such as AI, thereby helping to drive audience engagement, especially among the younger audiences. We are thrilled with the tremendous success of the competition and we will continue integrating AI and interactive digital experiences into brand campaigns, enhancing audience engagement and storytelling.”

Founded in 1964 by A.G. Hinniappuhami, the Founding Chairman of Maliban, Zellers is Sri Lanka’s first home-grown chocolate manufacturer.