Ceylon Chamber commends Sri Lanka negotiators after tariff reduction

ECONOMYNEXT – Ceylon Chamber of Commerce has commended the Sri Lanka negotiating team for reducing a Trump tariff to 20 percent.

“While this is clear progress reflecting the value of sustained engagement and strategic diplomacy, it is now important to use this window of opportunity to work towards a long-term arrangement that ensures more stable and competitive market access for our exporters”, Krishan Balendra, Chairman said in a statement

“We appreciate the efforts of the officials involved for their proactive and strategic efforts, particularly in engaging with the U.S. Government and the Office of the United States Trade Representative (USTR) to secure this positive result.”

The Ceylon Chamber of Commerce commends the Government of Sri Lanka and the national negotiation team on the successful outcome of recent discussions with the United States, which led to a further reduction in the reciprocal tariff rate – from 30% to 20% – on Sri Lankan exports.

“While this is clear progress reflecting the value of sustained engagement and strategic diplomacy, it is now important to use this window of opportunity to work towards a long-term arrangement that ensures more stable and competitive market access for our exporters”, stated Krishan Balendra, Chairperson of the Ceylon Chamber.

We appreciate the efforts of the officials involved for their proactive and strategic efforts, particularly in engaging with the U.S. Government and the Office of the United States Trade Representative (USTR) to secure this positive result.

As Sri Lanka continues its path toward economic recovery, we encourage further collaboration to address remaining non-tariff barriers and foster a more enabling environment for bilateral trade and investment. Deepening commercial ties in a mutually beneficial manner will be critical to strengthening Sri Lanka’s export competitiveness. At the same time, the country must focus on diversifying its export portfolio and expanding market access through strategic trade agreements.

The Ceylon Chamber will continue to work with the Government through practical engagement, informed input from industry, and clear representation of private sector priorities.