Rise of the underworld and political rhetoric

A deceptive lull in underworld killings prompted the government to brag that the ongoing crime-busting ops had yielded the desired results, and the Opposition, which kept a daily tab on shootings across the country, had been left red-faced. But it was shattered by a high-profile killing on Wednesday.

Chairman of the Weligama Pradeshiya Sabha (PS) Lasantha Wickremesekera (SJB) was shot dead inside his office in the PS building itself. The unidentified killer and his accomplice made good their escape. The Opposition went ballistic in Parliament, holding the government accountable for the killing on the grounds that the NPP had done its darndest to prevent the victim from securing the post of Chairman in the PS, and his request to the IGP for protection in view of threats to his life had gone unheeded. It tried to invoke the dreadful memories of political killings by the JVP, the main constituent of the ruling NPP, in the late 1980s, when unidentified gunmen went berserk.

The political parties that have ruled this country during the past several decades are notorious for their past crimes. Prominent among them are the SLFP, the UNP, the SLPP and the JVP. Therefore, it is only natural that the governments in power, led by these parties, become prime suspects when their rivals are assaulted or killed. One may recall that in January 2009, the assassination of Lasantha Wickrematunge was immediately blamed on the Mahinda Rajapaksa government, which had turned hostile towards him, and 16 years on, the JVP-led NPP government has been held responsible for the assassination of Lasantha Wickremesekera on similar grounds. That is the way the cookie crumbles in Sri Lankan politics.

No sooner had the Weligama PS Chairman been gunned down than Public Security Minister Ananda Wijepala declared in Parliament that the victim had had underworld links, implying that his killing was the result of a gang rivalry. Now that the Public Security Minister has made that declaration, the police, known for their servility to the powers that be, are likely to stop probing the killing from other angles, even suppress evidence that runs counter to the minister’s line of reasoning, and try to bolster his claim. Crimes such as political assassinations remain unsolved in this country mainly because of the servility of the police to politicians in power. If Minister Wijepala’s claim is true, then the police must be made to explain why they did not take any action against Wickremesekera.

Minister Wijepala’s statement at issue was an obvious attempt to discredit the JVP’s rivals for nominating individuals with criminal records to contest elections. His argument is counterproductive. If those with criminal records should not enter politics, the JVP will be among those disqualified from contesting elections, given its past crimes such as murders including political assassinations, arson, armed robberies, the destruction of public properties, and violent disruptions to state institutions. JVP General Secretary Tilvin Silva was behind bars for his involvement in southern terrorism. Nandana Gunathilake, the JVP candidate in the 1999 presidential election, has admitted that he was a member of the JVP’s military wing (DJV), which committed heinous crimes in the late 1980s. Minister Lal Kantha has also made a similar claim and sought to romanticise the destruction of public assets during that period. Many members of the UNP, the SLFP, and the SPP have also committed crimes. In fact, this country will be a better place if the individuals and political parties with criminal records are debarred from contesting elections.

Wednesday’s killing has demonstrated, regardless of the motive for it, that underworld gangs are still capable of striking at will; nobody is safe, and the government and the police have a long way to go in neutralising the netherworld of crime and drugs. Let the government and the Opposition be urged to keep an open mind and act with restraint without rushing to conclusions.

The rise of the underworld is an indictment on successive governments and the police. They must be ashamed of their collective impotence. One can only hope that the police will act impartially, without being swayed by pressure from their superiors loyal to the current dispensation and the ruling party politicians, and bring the killer of the Weligama PS Chairman and the mastermind behind the crime to justice—and fast.

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.