Tokyo Cement Group honoured for impactful CSR at SLIM Brand Excellence 2025

Tokyo Cement Group’s longstanding commitment to social progress and sustainability was honoured with a CSR Brand of the Year Merit Award at the SLIM Brand Excellence 2025 Awards ceremony held recently. The accolade recognises the Group’s flagship environmental conservation and community empowerment initiatives, designed to drive national transformation through meaningful, measurable CSR initiatives.

The Tokyo Cement led environmental stewardship programmes appraised by the award includes mangrove restoration, forest plant nurseries, coral reef rehabilitation, and marine biodiversity conservation projects, aimed at creating a sustainable and greener future. Through decades of collaborative engagement with expert project partners Tokyo Cement has delivered remarkable milestones in each focus area. This includes planting nearly 100,000 mangrove saplings along the Northern and Eastern coastlines and supplying over 116,000 forest trees nurtured at its own nurseries. The company’s Coral Reef Rehabilitation project, which upcycles ready-mixed concrete waste, has deployed more than 1,000 Reef Balls that act as artificial reef substrates at critical reef restoration sites around the island.

Among Tokyo Cement’s most influential sustainability initiatives is its Renewable Energy Programme that makes its entire local manufacturing process 100% energy independent through an installed capacity of 24MW. With the support of nearly 2,500 farming families across the Mahiyangana, Badulla, Monaragala, Trincomalee, Kilinochchi, and Jaffna districts, who have helped plant more than 10 million Gliricidia trees, the company plays a key role in mobilising the country’s rural economy.

Environmental damage now a direct threat to telecom operations, SLT chief warns at 2026 calendar launch

LAUGFS Rubber clinches Silver at NCPC Awards 2025 for Cleaner Production Excellence

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.