Power of criminals

The police called for suspending the Kavadi dance segment of the historic Devinuwara Vishnu Maha Devalaya main procession amidst security concerns due to a possible eruption of violence between two Kavadi groups alleged to underworld connections. The police asked the Devalaya officials to do without Kavadi this year following threats issued by an underworld figure, known as Mohamed Imran aka Kanjipani Imran that he would not allow  Kavadi dance to be performed in the Perahera without the participation of a group of dancers backed by him.

It was reported that threat assessments carried out by the state intelligence agencies had indicated the possibility of a violent clash in case of the Kavadi segment being included in the Perahera.

But Minister of Public Security Ananda Wijepala yesterday granted permission for all Kavadi dance troupes that participated in last year’s procession to take part in this year’s Perahera as well. Thus, an underworld character has succeeded in forcing the custodians of a holy shrine, the government and the police into bending to his will.

The JVP-NPP government boasts of having launched a series of successful anti-crime operations, but drug dealers and other criminals remain powerful, so much so that their members are carrying out narcotics operations and unleashing violence in heavily guarded prisons and threatening to attack religious festivals.

An online campaign got underway to make the call for the Devinuwara Devale officials to do without Kavadi in the Perahera this year out to be proof of the government’s subservience to the underworld. This narrative has more to do with political propaganda than a dispassionate assessment of the ground situation. This may be one of the reasons why the government decided to allow all Kavadi groups to perform in this year’s Perahera. However, its decision will be seen as a victory of Imran. Now, all precautions will have to be taken to prevent a clash between rival groups of dancers.

Terrorists and other criminals have to be lucky only once. The task of neutralising underworld threats to a religious festival cannot be accomplished overnight by simply deploying the police and the armed forces. If the police and the intelligence agencies are of the view that the best way to handle the underworld threat at issue is to suspend the Kavadi dance segment in the Devinuwara Perahera, they cannot be faulted for that.

The manner in which a criminal’s threats to the Devinuwara Perahera have unsettled the law enforcement authorities is proof of the growing vulnerability of the state vis-à-vis the power of crime syndicates involved in drug trafficking, contract killings and gun running. This is no longer just a public security issue; it is a threat to national security. Hence, the need for the government, the police, the intelligence agencies, and, if necessary, the armed forces to go all out to neutralise the underworld.

Helping the government tame the Opposition has apparently become the raison d’etre of the police, especially the CID. There is no gainsaying that the former rulers and their associates responsible for criminal activities, including financial crimes, must be brought to book, but the police must remain focused on protecting the public against organised criminal gangs that are still capable of striking anywhere at will.

The police must redouble their efforts to trace Kanjipani Imran, who is operating from overseas, and have him extradited to stand trial. Equally, an investigation should be conducted to find out how he managed to obtain bail in 2022. According to media reports, he was held under the Prevention of Terrorism Act, after being brought back from Dubai together with another notorious criminal, Makandure Madush, but subsequently the police filed charges against him under the Penal Code, paving the way for his release on bail.

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.