Sri Lanka must hold parliamentary elections first: Mahinda Rajapaksa

ECONOMYNEXT — Sri Lanka must hold parliamentary elections before the presidential election, former president and leader of the ruling Sri Lanka Podujana Peramuna (SLPP) Mahinda Rajapaksa said.

Taking questions from reporters on Thursday March 21, Rajapaksa said he agrees with a proposal made by his brother and SLPP national organiser Basil Rajapaksa that the parliamentary election must be prioritised.

“We’re ready for any election. But the best thing is what Basil has proposed, to have the parliamentary election first followed by the presidential election,” the former president said.

“Otherwise, any party that wins the presidential election will score a major victory at the next parliamentary election. For there to be fairness, the parliamentary election must be held first,” he said.

SLPP legislator S M Chandrasena told reporters that on Tuesday that Basil Rajapaksa had told party members that President Ranil Wickremesinghe would be a suitable candidate for the presidential election but the parliamentary polls should be held at first.

Rajapaksa had said President Wickremesinghe is a “skilled leader and a good candidate”.

Rajapaksa recently told the privately owned NewsFirst network that the next parliament will be a more balanced one if parliamentary elections are held before a presidential election and won’t result in any one party monopolising political power.

The SLPP ideologue said power should not be concentrated around one party.

Constitutionally, Sri Lanka’s next presidential election is due to be held between September 17 and October 17 this year. President Ranil Wickremesinghe, who heads a government led by the formerly rival SLPP, has said that the presidential election will be held before a parliamentary election.

But Wickremesinghe hasn’t yet said definitively that he intends to contest the election.

Government spokesmen have also alluded to proposals of abolishing the executive presidency this year, which would effectively render the prospects of a presidential election null and void.

The SLPP is currently trailing behind other parties in at least one voting intent poll. (Colombo/Mar22/2024)