THE RICH ARE GETTING RICHER, THE POOR ARE GETTING POORER – THAT’S THE DILEMMA

It’s a potentially explosive scenario that will confront any party in power

Due to the Marxist heritage of the NPP, the two expectations that swept them into power, with the votes of the poor, was that corruption will be eliminated, and that urgent plans will be executed to make the poor less poor.

Whilst there has been commendable progress in attacking corruption, still no signs of longer term strategies to make the poor less poor.

The problem that creates this scenario ,is the well entrenched economic model that governs the economy .It is one that perpetuates the current economic scenario, that lets the rich become richer, whilst the poor remain poor.

As the Government have no plans to create a radically new economic model that will make the poor less poor ,the government is probably sitting on a powder keg with a relatively short fuse.

Many moons ago I was a lecturer in Economics at the Colombo campus. Following the traditions at Cambridge (where I did my degree ), I invited small groups of students for a drink and chit chat, on economic-related matters.

They said that under the economic model prevailing at that time, they will continue to be poor..

In simple words without any economic jargon, they were saying that we need a revolution to make the poor less poor .I do not know whether they knew anything about Chairman Mao in China. He too had none of the slowly, slowly, catch the monkey approach. He rushed to destroy the then prevailing economic moulds, that ensured ,that wealth remained with the rich, whilst the poor remained poor. Post revolution led by Mao they created a new economic mould that would ensure the creation of an egalitarian society.

Ho Chi Minh then a highly respected Marxist was the only one who adopted a step by step approach to change their then existing mould in Vietnam.

When I was an undergraduate at Cambridge University, I went for a Communist youth conference and spent six weeks in Moscow. A tutor at Cambridge suggested that I shoud do some project whilst in Russia. My project was to ascertain the relative salary levels .Starting from the lowest paid. I determined other salary payments and expressed them as a multiple of the lowest paid.

In most places the head of the business earned about four times the salary of the lowest paid. It was a small sample from the places I was taken to by my guide who was a young Communist, but it gave the flavour of the wage structure.

We are a country of 1000’s of villages. As we travel a few miles from any major town we begin to see the familiar rural scenario .That’s the heartland of our country. That’s also the heartland of the poor. To create a more prosperous country we have to create prosperous rural communities .Creating a few scattered prosperous urban pockets in rural Sri Lanka will not be the pathway for creating a prosperous country.

He is the only politician that was emotionally committed to bring some economic prosperity to rural Sri Lanka. His intention was to create employment opportunities in the rural areas by bringing industry to the rural countryside. Sadly he was killed and we did not get a picture of the full scenario he had in mind. His vision (we guess) was perhaps to create prosperous villages, and help the poor to be less poor. It was probably very different from a vision of using the rural poor to provide cheap labour for industry..

Manufacture has now moved to rural areas to get cheap docile rural labour, without the fires of trade unions burning their ankles. This movement of some manufacturing activity to rural areas has become another exercise that makes the rich richer whilst leaving the poor..

It was Marx and Lenin who said that then existing economic mould that had created the economic scenario prevailing at that time in Russia had to be completely destroyed and replaced with one that will create an egalitarian society. We too need a radically different economic mould that will ensure that funds and other resources flow into economic activities that will make poor less poor..

Create a raft of prosperous villages, building around the traditional activities in that area.

If there is fishing then create a vibrant fishing industry.Provide cold storage facilites for every group of fishing villages. Provide cold storage vehicles for transporting fish to other parts of the country. Ensure that all the other facilities required like rescue boats are provided. This will create clusters of prosperous villages around the country. If there are spices then create prosperous village around spices

Provide what is required to sustain these villages – good roads, access to medical

The new mould should facilitate the flow of resources to activities that will reduce poverty The State should provide all of this as a part of their economic plans for the country. There is need to be ruthless. If there is a foreign exchange cost, and if this could be found only by stopping the imports of cars, this should be done until adequate funds are available.

Revitalizing villages could also be a route to generate exports.

Growing flowers is such a project that can create prosperous flower growing villages and also provide flowers for export. But the grower gets only the crumbs. For fruits, flowers and spices, the grower must be protected from the middle men or else the poor will remain poor.

To develop anything investment is essential. It is investment that makes the wheels turn and converts poverty to prosperity. The heartland of our country comprises thousands of villages. If we have prosperous villages we will have a prosperous country . Why didn’t we have large scale investment that would have created the essential infrastructure vital to create growth? We were able to find the funds and have major investments, but they did not help to develop the country. But they perhaps benefited those who initiated these investments that had no impact on developing the country

Metaphorically speaking China dangled a lollipop. They invested USD 1.4 billion to reclaim 269 ha of land from the sea off Galle Face (Colombo Port City), the title for which was retained by the Government of Sri Lanka), in return for a 99-year lease of 116 ha of the reclaimed land.

After number of sessions of waving the lollipop under our nose we agreed and said yes to the proposal of reclaiming land from the sea and giving China a 99-year lease on part of the reclaimed land. The reclamation was concluded by the China Harbour Engineering Corporation (CHEC). Both our and the Chinese share of the reclaimed land remained idle for years. Now a grand package of tax and other benefits has attracted a few investors who plan to build apartments and commercial space on this prime reclaimed land.

(The writer after degree from Cambridge University joined Reckitt Benckiser Plc UK. When appointed to the main board of Reckitt was first Lankan on the Board of a top 100 Company in the Uk. Post retirement he returned to Sri Lanka and was Chairman,Sri Lanka Telecom, BOI, First Capital Holdings and Hemas Holdings Plc)

The Sirisena – Ranil conflict and events leading to MR’s return as PM

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.