Significant impact as Miss Universe Sri Lanka 2024

Melloney Dassanayake is a multifaceted personality who did make a significant impact as Miss Universe Sri Lanka 2024, and continues to do so.

On Sunday, 27th July, 2025, she officially passed on the crown to Miss Universe Sri Lanka 2025.

Melloney’s journey began in September last year, when she was crowned Miss Universe Sri Lanka 2024, at Citrus Waskaduwa.

She also won the Best Catwalk award, and, with just a few weeks to prepare, she stepped onto the Miss Universe international stage, in Mexico City, in November.

“It was a whirlwind … intense, emotional, and powerful. But I had one mission: to remind the world that Sri Lanka is back – bold, radiant, and unshakable. And I’m proud to say, I did just that.”

Melloney mentioned that she is ever so grateful to her family, and her grandparents, for their love and support, and to her fiancé for being her peace, her power, and her biggest believer.

“To my friends, relatives, mentors, and every beautiful soul who lifted me up, I carry your kindness and encouragement in every step, not forgetting the Miss Universe Sri Lanka Organisation 2024 for trusting me, guiding me, and shaping me.”

Melloney is a banker and professional model with a Bachelor’s degree in Business Administration. She is also a former national basketball player.

What’s so special about Melloney is that she advocates for women’s financial empowerment and literacy, supports economic independence and informed decision-making, particularly among women.

What’s more, she emphasises the importance of intelligence, emotional depth, and leadership in beauty pageants.

“I’m keen to encourage young girls to trust their inner voice, take risks, and stay true to themselves.”

All her efforts do pay rich dividends as she also won the Multifaceted Career Excellence Award at the New Generation Top40 Awards 2025 held at the Shangri-La on 12th June.

Miss Universe Sri Lanka 2024 is very much focused on making a positive impact on society, rather than just holding titles, and I’m certain she is going to leave a lasting legacy as a dynamic force of nature, role model, athlete, professional, and philanthropist.

Melloney Dassanayake also had a special word for The Island newspaper.

“I’m so happy and proud to be a part of The Island newspaper scene and thank you for all the publicity given to me. It’s so gratifying to see my work being appreciated and highlighted.

“Keep writing, Ivan, and sharing your passion with the world. Your dedication to journalism is truly commendable, and I’m honoured to be a part of your creative process. All the best with your future articles and endeavours!”

Widening intra-West rift over Palestinian statehood and the recognition of humanity

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.