Sri Lanka African Swine Fever epidemic waning after claiming 67,000 pigs

ECONOMYNEXT – The spread of African Swine Fever in the Sri Lanka is about 95 percent under control, Hemali Kothalawala, Director General of the Department of Animal Production and Health has said after 2,500 farms were infected, killing of 67,000 hogs and also infecting wild boars.

“We have curtailed the spread by taking stringent measures; veterinary surgeons inspect pig farms and ensure biosafety methods is maintained, and we have banned the transport of infected pigs and meat,” Kothalawala told reporters at a recent briefing.

2,500 farms across the nine provinces were infected, while 251 farms have now re-opened.

“The number of reported deaths is 67,000. But we feel the actual number of deaths is more, because of unreported deaths.”

The prevalence of the disease in the island was first identified last September, in the Gampaha District of the western province. The government then issued a gazette banning transport of pigs or meat.

“Once we identified the presence of the disease in the country, we took steps to control the spread,” Palika Fernando, Additional Secretary to Ministry of Agriculture, Livestock, Land and Irrigation said.

It had already spread rapidly in the western and northwestern provinces by then, she said, where the island’s swine farms are mostly concentrated.

“But the nature of this virus is that it has a 100 percent fatality rate, so lots of pig farms got decimated.”

It had also spread to the central and northern provinces. “Then it spread to the wildlife areas and other provinces.”

“One was that most pig farms are irregular. This made it hard to control the spread of the disease.”

“Then they are transported also in a haphazard manner. That also facilitated the disease to spread to other regions fast.”

She said that there was yet a shortage of meat for consumption even now because the industry completely collapsed due to the spread of the disease.

“There is an urgent need to build up the industry now,” she said, adding that the ministry has devised plans and had appointed a task force.

Although loans are available for small and medium entrepreneurs, some banks hesitate because the disease is still prevalent, she said.

Changes will be made to existing laws to make it mandatory for all farms to be registered, and for transport of pigs or meat to require a veterinarian’s certification, she said. (Colombo/July20/2025)