Dialog takes personalisation to new heights with AI-driven greeting cards, powered by Star Points

Dialog Axiata PLC, Sri Lanka’s #1 connectivity provider, along with Star Points announced its foray into the exciting world of Artificial Intelligence (AI) by launching Sri Lanka’s first AI-generated personalised greeting cards. The initiative leverages the incredible power of AI to keep friends and family connected and is a step towards adopting AI as an everyday experience.

With AI, a rapidly growing field with the potential to transform numerous aspects of a user’s life, the launch signifies Dialog’s continued commitment to being at the forefront of innovation. The new, personalised greeting card service offers a glimpse into this exciting future, demonstrating a real-world application of AI that fosters creativity, personalisation, and meaningful connections.

Commenting, Anthony Rodrigo, Group Chief Innovation Officer, Dialog Axiata PLC said “At Dialog Axiata PLC, we are constantly exploring new frontiers in technology to empower our customers and enrich their lives. The launch of Sri Lanka’s first AI-powered greeting cards marks another milestone in our AI journey. This innovative service allows users to express themselves in unique and creative ways, fostering stronger connections with their loved ones. We are excited to be at the forefront of AI in Sri Lanka and believe this technology has the potential to transform numerous aspects of our daily experiences”.

Sandra De Zoysa, Group Chief Customer Officer, Dialog Axiata PLC also stated “As a premier loyalty programme in the country, Dialog Star Points is thrilled to announce the launch of Sri Lanka’s first AI-powered personalised greeting card initiative to our loyal customers. Now customers can use their points to connect and celebrate with their loved ones using customised greeting cards to create more meaningful connections. This marks a significant step forward in leveraging AI technology to improve the customer experience and loyalty engagement, and we firmly believe that such innovations will redefine the future of loyalty landscape in Sri Lanka.”

Triple Crown winner Halgolla Estate highlights need for environment-friendly businesses

LOLC Savi and SLT-Mobitel Upahara join forces to enhance services for state sector employees

Dialog named Sri Lanka’s Most Loved Service and Telco Brand by LMD Brands Annual

Dialog launches country’s first smartphone plan available to all Sri Lankans

Sri Lanka’s Para athletes shine at World Para Athletics Championships

Dialog Customers Contribute Over Rs. 18 Million to Little Hearts via Star Points

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.