Elephant House to storm Indian shelves

One of Sri Lanka’s most popular lines of beverages will soon be on the shelves of India, with Reliance Consumer Products Limited (RCPL) partnering with Elephant House to manufacture, market, distribute and sell beverages.

The partnership between the fast-moving consumer goods (FMCG) arm and wholly-owned subsidiary of Reliance Retail Ventures Limited and Elephant House was announced yesterday.

The partnership is not only expected to help RCPL bolster its growing beverage portfolio but will also bring exceptional new products and value propositions to the Indian consumers.

Elephant House is owned by Ceylon Cold Stores PLC, a subsidiary of John Keells Holdings PLC, Sri Lanka’s largest listed conglomerate. Under the Elephant House brand, it manufactures and sells a wide range of beverages, including Necto, Cream Soda, EGB (Ginger Beer), Orange Barley and Lemonade, to name a few.

“Elephant House, which enjoys strong market credibility, is an iconic brand with deep-rooted heritage. Being the custodian of several renowned global brands in India, Reliance is well-equipped to further expand Elephant House’s established consumer brand, which has been built over 150 years,” said RCPL COO Ketan Mody.

“Our partnership with RCPL marks a significant milestone in the journey of our heritage brand and represents our commitment to delivering our high-quality beverages to new consumer segments.

We look forward to the opportunity this partnership brings, to provide refreshing and innovative beverage options to meet the diverse preferences of the Indian consumers,” said John Keells Group Chairperson Krishan Balendra, commenting on the partnership.

The agreement between RCPL and Elephant House underscores a shared commitment to excellence and innovation, empowering both organisations to capitalise on synergies and amplify their market presence.

RCPL’s vision is to offer the Indian consumers a wide portfolio of globally recognised brands and products that stand out for their exceptional quality and value. In addition, RCPL is rapidly scaling up its multi channel operations to reach more consumers across diverse markets.

The company, currently, boasts a versatile FMCG portfolio comprising iconic beverage brands, including Campa and Sosyo Hajoori, an extensive confectionery range from Lotus Chocolates, Toffeeman and snacks such as Alan’s Bugles and Masti Oye, apart from Sri Lanka’s leading biscuit brand Maliban and staples and daily convenience products under the Independence brand. In home and personal care, it has products such as dishwashing liquids, laundry detergent, soaps and toilet cleaners.