Mahindra Ideal Finance expands vehicle financing reach through strategic partnership with Indra Traders

Mahindra Ideal Finance Ltd. (MIFL), a licensed non-bank financial institution regulated by the Central Bank of Sri Lanka, signed a Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) with Indra Traders (Pvt) Ltd., one of Sri Lanka’s largest multi-brand vehicle distributors, to introduce comprehensive leasing offerings for vehicle buyers across the country. The agreement was formalized on 15 August 2025, in Colombo.

The partnership brings together MIFL’s multi – brand vehicle financing capabilities and Indra Traders’ extensive vehicle portfolio to deliver affordable, seamless and value-driven leasing solutions for customers purchasing registered and unregistered vehicles.

Under the MoU, Mahindra Ideal Finance will extend preferential leasing rates starting from as low as 9.99% p.a. for customers purchasing vehicles through Indra Traders. Customers will also benefit from a wide range of after-sales services offered by Indra Traders. These include a two-year warranty on engine and gearbox and a three-year warranty on hybrid batteries for unregistered vehicles, along with multiple rounds of labour – free services for their vehicles. Pre-owned vehicle buyers will also receive warranty coverage and service support under the scheme.

Speaking on the partnership, Mahindra Ideal Finance Ltd. Managing Director and CEO, Mufaddal Choonia said:

“We are delighted to collaborate with Indra Traders to make vehicle financing more accessible and service led. This partnership allows us to deliver a truly integrated value offering that covers not only competitive leasing options but also peace of mind for customers through enhanced post-purchase support.”

Speaking on behalf of Indra Traders, Director Sales and Marketing, Hashindra Silva said

“This partnership with Mahindra Ideal Finance Ltd. represents a significant step forward in broadening vehicle accessibility and delivering enhanced customer value. With our robust after-sales service and trusted reputation, combined with MIFL’s competitive leasing solutions, we are confident of offering customers a seamless and reliable experience in vehicle ownership.”

Spa Ceylon in forefront of helping to manage Human-Elephant Conflict

ComBank achieves a world first with LoungeKey access for UnionPay Asia Prestige Cards

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.