Cambridge heralds new chapter for English assessment with Linguaskill

Cambridge University Press and Assessment will formally introduce Linguaskill to Sri Lanka at an exclusive, invitation-only event titled ‘Linguaskill Unlocked: Unlocking World-Class English with Cambridge’ today from 3:30 p.m. to 5:30 p.m. at the Courtyard by Marriott, Colombo.

The event marks the official launch of Linguaskill—the online, certificated English proficiency exam from Cambridge, in Sri Lanka. Trusted by leading organisations worldwide, including international corporates such as Air France and higher education institutions such as RMIT University, Linguaskill is designed to assess English proficiency accurately and efficiently across academic, professional, and workplace contexts.

The program will feature a keynote address by Cambridge University Press and Assessment Managing Director (South Asia) Arun Rajamani, followed by an inspirational address by Janashakthi Group CEO Ramesh Schaffter on the theme ‘English: Enabling global standards, from Sri Lanka.’

The event will bring together senior leaders from Sri Lanka’s corporate sector, higher education institutions, professional bodies, and authorised Linguaskill centres to engage in dialogue on global English standards, professional and workforce readiness, and the evolving role of English assessment.

A panel discussion titled ‘Unlocking World-Class English’ will feature CX Strategist and Transformation Leader Sandra De Zoysa, Infomate CEO Jehan Perinpanayagam, A. Baur & Co., DGM – HR, Admin, Purchasing and Sustainability Ken Vijayakumar, ANC Education CEO and Wycherley Group of Schools Coordinating Principal Dayan Fernando, and Informatics Institute of Technology Professional Development Unit Head Achini Fernando. The session will be moderated by Cambridge University Press and Assessment Business Development Manager – English (Sri Lanka) Haaziq Feroze.

Cambridge University Press and Assessment Country Head – Sri Lanka and The Maldives Zahara Ansary said: “Linguaskill responds to a growing need in Sri Lanka for an accurate, reliable, and internationally benchmarked English assessment. It enables institutions and employers to measure real-world communication skills while supporting learners and professionals to meet global standards.”

Linguaskill is recognised by leading educational institutions and employers and can be used for high-stakes purposes such as student admission or graduation at university or recruiting and developing employees.

Linguaskill is a certificated exam that delivers a fair and accurate result – ensuring employers and recognising bodies can be confident in an individual’s abilities. Candidates receive a certificate with in-depth reporting on the modules they’ve taken, plus an average score across the exam. The exam has built-in advanced security technology, and certification to the highest level on the Common European Framework of Reference (CEFR).The event is hosted by Cambridge University Press and Assessment in Sri Lanka, reaffirming its commitment to advancing education, skills development, and global employability standards in the country.