Ceylinco Life concludes Family Savari 18 with spectacular Malaysia tour for policyholder families

Ceylinco Life recently concluded the 18th edition of the ‘Family?Savari’ rewards programme with a breathtaking all-expenses-paid holiday tour to Malaysia for its policyholder winners and their families.

From 13th to 16th June, 10 policyholders and their family members – a total of 40 guests – were treated to a luxurious three-night, four-day tour in Malaysia, accompanied by Family Savari celebrity ambassadors Roshan Ranawana, his wife Kushlani, and their son Minneth.

Ceylinco Life covered all costs, including airfares, accommodation, meals, transport and tours. The itinerary featured visits to iconic attractions such as the Petronas Twin Towers, Lake Symphony Light & Water Show, KLCC Aquarium, the scenic Genting Highlands with cable-car rides, and the spiritual Batu caves. The tour culminated in an exclusive private gala dinner for the families to celebrate together.

This Malaysia trip marks the successful conclusion of Family Savari 18, which rewarded a total of 265 policyholder families. The rewards including a fun-filled day for 250 families at Bandaragama’s Pearl Bay Water Park, and an earlier holiday to Shanghai, China, for five families.

Ceylinco Life’s Family Savari, remains the most generous loyalty programme in Sri Lanka’s life insurance sector. “We’re immensely proud to reward our policyholders with these unforgettable family experiences,” Ceylinco Life Executive Director/Chief Operating Officer Samitha Hemachandra said. “From local excursions to overseas tours, Family Savari is about celebrating loyalty and strengthening bonds.”

Sri Lanka Insurance Suba Pathum Scholarship awards 225 Scholarships for School Children

Trinity Global rolls out LTW 200 and BO2, driving Lanka’s e-mobility shift

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.