Sri Lanka president to contest election under new alliance: Harin

ECONOMYNEXT — President Ranil Wickremesinghe will contest the presidential election from a new alliance, Tourism Minister Harin Fernando said.

“The president will be nonpartisan. He will contest from a separate alliance,” Fernando told reporters.

“Wait a little. It’ll happen,” he said, presumably to a question about why the president still hasn’t officially announced his intention to contest.

Fernando also claimed that most people supporting the National People’s Power (NPP) are those who enthusiastically voted for another party in 2019.

“People think they’ll be cleansed of their sins if they attack us and throw their lot in with a new party. But if you look closely, most people supporting the NPP are those who enthusiastically voted in 2019 and have now gone to that side. It’s not the same 3 percent that was there then,” he said.

The minister also had a word of caution for NPP leader Anura Kumara Dissanayake who intends to contest the presidential poll on the NPP ticket.

“He will also be in for a time taking those sorts to his side,” said Fernando.

NPP member Sunil Handunneththi speaking to reporters said neither President Wickremesinghe nor the likes of MP Harsha de Silva, who is responsible for formulating the economic policy of the main opposition Samagi Jana Balawegaya (SJB), can save Sri Lanka.

“If we’re talking about bankruptcy now, who is responsible for that? It was Ranil Wickremesinghe and the Rajpaksas that bankrupted this country. It was under Wickremesinghe that the country went for the highest number of international sovereign bonds (ISBs). There’s no point asking us for our support to solve the country’s problems under his presidency after making even the unborn children of this country indebted,” said Handunneththi.

“Wickremesinghe and his administration and groups like Harsha de Silva have all proved that they cannot save this country,” he said.

The NPP currently leads at least one voting intention poll. (Colombo/Mar13/2024)