Pakistan’s NWFP and Myanmar: silent suffering mounts

Pakistan’s North-West Frontier Province or Khyber Pakhtunkhwa (KP) and Myanmar could be considered two Asian theatres of conflict and war where human suffering has been on a relentless and silent spiral over the years. The conflicts have all but been forgotten, it could be said, by the world community.

While those more than occasional bomb attacks on the KP-Afghan border remind the world of the humanly costly continuance of the conflict in Pakistan’s NWFP, the ongoing, grinding youth-led revolt in Myanmar is hardly covered with any consistency by even the international media. Consequently, the world’s publics remain largely ignorant of the disquieting dimensions of these conflicts.

Yet it is of the utmost importance for the publics of the South in particular to not only be enlightened about the ground realities and the day-to-day developments in these conflict zones but to look at them analytically. For, in a number of notable respects they replicate the fundamental realities of Southern polities and their challenges.

In Pakistan’s KP, for example, the forces of religious fundamentalism could be said to be in overdrive. Called the ‘Pakistan Taliban’ the principal aim of these forces is to convert KP into an Islamic fundamentalist enclave where the Sharia law would be enthroned. Thus they have close ideological affinities with the Afghan Taliban regime.

However, their separatist proclivities and external affinities put the ‘Pakistan Taliban’ on a collision course with the Pakistani federal government which has been in an effort to dis-empower the outfit militarily.

This accounts in the main for those security-related incidents, which often take civilian lives, on the NWFP-Afghanistan border. In the latest of one such incident a suicide bomb blast at a peace rally killed some 14 persons and wounded 22 others. The attack was said to have been carried out by the religious hard line Tehrik-e-Taliban Pakistan (TTP), a ‘Pakistan Taliban’ outfit.

While drawing urgent attention to the rising human costs of Afghan Taliban-inspired security incidents for Pakistan, since the TTP is considered an offshoot of the Afghan Taliban, these developments illustrate afresh the divisive consequences of persisting identity politics in the NWFP and in the wider region.

The Pashtuns are the numerically largest community in Afghanistan, accounting for some 42 percent of the population. However, the ethnic group spills over also into KP, where it is a dominant presence and where the TTP is in the forefront of militarily advancing the political aims of hard line Pashtuns. Thus, the Pakistani centre is compelled to deal with the TTP militarily and this translates often into a loss of civilian lives.

However, the consequences of the above developments have begun to be felt in the sphere of regional inter-state relations as well. Pakistan dealing with the TPP militarily has meant that Afghanistan has begun to build better ties with India since some Pakistani air strikes against TPP strongholds on the Afghanistan-NWFP border are being seen as violative of its sovereignty by the Afghan side.

In this connection a development of considerable importance is the upgrading of India’s ties with Afghanistan to the extent of India establishing an embassy in Kabul. Hopefully from now on Afghanistan would be encouraged by India to soften its religious fundamentalist outlook and relate to its neighbours in more secular and cooperative terms since regional solidarity is of the first importance.

Meanwhile, the lot of Myanmar is even more doleful. The challenge which was posed to the country’s military junta by the country’s youth with the main aim of seeing an end to the regime’s repressive hold on the country is petering out it seems.

Reports indicate that instead of taking some steps in the direction of democratization and equity, the junta is only coming down harder on the youthful rebels. Youngsters in their hundreds are reportedly deserting rank and opting to go into hiding or are escaping overseas. Besides scores of youth have been killed or are languishing behind bars.

Worse still, Myanmarese families are facing stepped-up impoverishment and destitution. The law and order crisis, it seems, is being compounded by an economic crisis and the country’s economic dis-empowerment seems to be deepening.

Sections of the international media citing a UNDP study released in April 2024 said, among other things: ‘Myanmar’s middle class collapsed by 50 percent within three years of the coup, marking the nation’s rapid economic decline.’ The fallout for the country’s youth in particular from this crisis is most distressing. They are left helpless because even escaping abroad is proving unfeasible since their elders are not in a position to support them in higher educational pursuits.

On the other hand, remaining home will for many of them mean being hunted down and forced to join the army which is also fighting to put down years long ethnic rebellions in some parts of the country.

However, Myanmar’s agonies are being compounded by a lack of empathy and support for it on the part of some vital sections of the international community. For instance, ASEAN’s ‘constructive engagement’ policy with regard to Myanmar is proving a virtual non-starter. While the country is not being urged to implement democratic reforms urgently its internationally reputed leader Aung San Suu Kyi is continuing to languish in a state of isolation.

Apparently, economic compulsions are preventing some ASEAN member states from pursuing a tougher policy line on the Myanmarese military junta. Reports indicate that Singapore is Myanmar’s biggest source of foreign investment. From 2018 to 2020, Singapore reportedly invested some $4.2 billion in Myanmar.

Accordingly, little help would come from ASEAN in efforts to end the junta’s military repression in Myanmar and in the implementation of any democratization projects for the latter. The country faces the dismal prospect of remaining in a state of dis-empowerment indefinitely.

Meanwhile, immediate support could not be expected from the UN system as well. Two major supporters of the junta are China and Russia and the powers that be in Myanmar could rely on these allies to stifle any political reforms for the latter that could be taken up by the UN Security Council for deliberation. That is, for the time being the status quo within Myanmar would stand.

The major democracies of the West, perhaps led by the EU, need to consider it incumbent on them to take up the cause of Myanmar in a major way. The time is ‘Now’ to act constructively.

From a whisper in rainforest to a national treasure: The Serendib Scops Owl still guards its secrets

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.