JKOA brings 4G connectivity to feature phone market

As Sri Lanka’s mobile landscape enters a new phase of connectivity, John Keells Office Automation (JKOA) is bringing the 4G technology beyond the smartphone market, with the launch of JKOA Classic 4G, giving the feature-phone users an affordable opportunity to stay connected as networks evolve.

Unveiled under the theme ‘Powering Tomorrow Together’ at JKOA’s Mobile Launch and Dealer Gathering at Courtyard by Marriott Colombo on September 7, JKOA Classic 4G marks a significant step in making next-generation connectivity more accessible to everyday consumers.

The launch marks a collaboration between JKOA and Dialog Axiata PLC, to extend the 4G connectivity to the feature-phone users. Reflecting Dialog’s continued efforts to broaden access to its 4G network, the collaboration provides the consumers who prefer the simplicity and practicality of feature phones with a more accessible pathway to next-generation mobile connectivity.

John Keells Holdings PLC (JKH) President Retail Sector Charitha Subasinghe said, “At JKOA, we have always believed that the best solutions begin with listening, understanding the evolving needs of our customers and dealer partners and responding in ways that make a real difference to them. The introduction of JKOA Classic 4G is a result of that ongoing dialogue. We saw an opportunity to bring together the simplicity, reliability and familiarity that the customers value in a feature phone, with the benefits of today’s 4G connectivity. It reflects our continued commitment to listening to the market and introducing solutions with our customers in mind.”

Priced at just Rs.7,990, the new device brings the power of 4G to the familiar simplicity of a feature phone, offering an affordable way for the consumers to stay ahead of the changing mobile landscape, without having to switch to a smartphone.

Whether used as a primary or secondary device or purchased for a family member, JKOA Classic 4G combines practicality with future-ready connectivity, giving the consumers a reason to think beyond today and choose with tomorrow in mind.

The device features the 4G connectivity for clearer calls, a compact 1.77-inch display, 1,000mAh long-lasting battery and Sinhala, Tamil and English typing. It also includes an FM radio, built-in torch, 16MB + 16MB internal memory and Type-C charging, with a charger and cable included.

Backed by the strength of JKH, JKOA brings to the Sri Lankan market a diverse portfolio of products across office automation and mobile technology, partnering with and representing the world-renowned brands.

Through its established expertise in importing, distributing and supporting technology products, JKOA connects the Sri Lankan consumers and businesses with trusted global brands and solutions, while responding to the evolving needs of the local market.

JKOA Classic 4G is currently available at the JKOA showroom and through authorised dealers islandwide, making it easily accessible to the customers across Sri Lanka.