Economic Transformation Bill should be sent back to the drawing board: experts

The proposed Economic Transformation Bill is not a carefully thought out document, therefore, the policymakers who played a role in drafting it should seriously reconsider it before making it a law of the country, a group of experts said last week.

They made this statement at a panel discussion held in Colombo on 18th June 2024. The All Union Alliance of the Board of Investment (BOI) of Sri Lanka, sponsored by the Free Trade Manufacturers Association, organized this event to raise awareness among investors and stakeholders about the potential consequences of the proposed Economic Transformation Bill (ETB).

The panel comprised Dr. Kalpa Rajapakse, economist/ senior lecturer at University of Peradeniya, President’s Counsel/ former BOI chairman Upul Jayasuriya, President’s Counsel Harsha Fernando and President’s Counsel Avindra Rodrigo.

They deeply delved into whether ETB would actually help attract foreign investments or repel them and they criticized the bill supported by facts and figures with sporadic sprinklings of compliment.

The following are some thoughts they expressed about the ETB.

The attempt to align with IMF conditions aims to enshrine IMF proposals into a binding law

Fiscal policies outlined in the bill mirror IMF recommendations from June 6, 2023, which could undermine Sri Lanka’s economic sovereignty.

Introduces new bureaucratic agencies that add more bureaucratic layers without addressing fundamental structural inefficiencies

Grant discretionary powers to ministers, affecting the transparency and effectiveness of the investment approval process

The sustainability of the proposed institutional structure is uncertain due to financial risks associated with improper allocation of funds.

The absence of a transitional period, driven by the urgency to introduce new reforms, increases the risk for investors during the operationalization phase.

Existing agreements are safeguarded under transitional provisions, but operational details under the new Economic Commission (EC) are still vague

Unpredictable tax regulations and frequent changes undermine investor confidence and operational planning

Comprehensive improvements to the Bill and rigorous implementation tailored to the local context is crucial

Dr. Rajapakse called for collective effort to not only challenge the bill but also to propose alternative strategies that prioritize social responsibility and environmental sustainability. He emphasized the need for inclusive economic decision-making that incorporates insights from diverse stakeholders, including academia and civil society.

Sri Lanka’s first influencer ramp walk at ‘Beauty Pink Night’

‘Nemadumen Pasu Amaduma’: Siyapatha Finance’s initiative to conserve Sri Pada

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.