INSEE Cement’s mangrove restoration programme contributes to Sri Lanka’s coastal and biodiversity protection

INSEE Cement has exceeded 10 hectares of mangrove restoration work in Sri Lanka, reaffirming its commitment to environmental conservation and biodiversity. Over the past six years, the company has demonstrated its dedication to environmental stewardship and community well-being, by 10,000 mangrove saplings and spearheading extensive mangrove restoration projects across the country.

This achievement has been possible due to INSEE’s strong partnerships and close collaboration with key stakeholders such as the Department of Wildlife, Department of Forests, Coastal Conservation Department (CCD), the Central Environmental Authority and local universities, under the direction of the Ministry of Environment. Technical guidance from the IUCN has further strengthened this work. INSEE employees also play a key role by participating in the mangrove restoration work, showcasing their commitments to Sri Lanka’s conservation.

“We carry out our mangrove restoration work along three locations in the Northwestern and Southern Provinces. From planting to diligent monitoring, we employ a range of maintenance activities to ensure the sustained growth and vitality of the mangrove plants,” says Rohan Lakmal, Senior Manager – Sustainability & Corporate Social Responsibility at INSEE Cement. “Through this mangrove restoration initiatives, our aim is to safeguard our precious ecosystems while also contributing to the well-being of local communities and the broader environment.”

INSEE Cement’s mangrove restoration work is a cornerstone of the company’s Sustainability Ambition 2030 which is built upon three key pillars: climate and energy, biodiversity and water, and the circular economy. These pillars are interwoven with the themes of zero harm for people and active community and stakeholder engagement, forming a comprehensive environmental, social, and governance framework that guides the company’s efforts.

The mangrove restoration journey dates back to 2017 with a project in Kurulu Duwa Island in Koggala, near the INSEE Ruhunu Cement Plant. In collaboration with the Department of Wildlife, the company started planting the Maha Kadol (Rhizophora mucronata) mangrove species. A distinctive aspect of this project is the use of pots made from damaged cement produced by the plant, highlighting INSEE’s innovative approach to sustainability.

Zesta invites Sri Lankan tea lovers to create the next Zesta commercial

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.