One Galle Face with ICT and Make-A-Wish Sri Lanka marks Children’s Day

One Galle Face has partnered with the Indira Cancer Trust (ICT) and Make-A-Wish Sri Lanka to create meaningful and memorable ‘Wish Experiences’ for children with critical illnesses in line with the Children’s Day.

As a leading lifestyle and retail destination, One Galle Face recognises the importance of creating experiences that extend beyond shopping and entertainment. Through this partnership, the mall will host special Wish Experiences, welcoming a child and their family for a specially curated day at One Galle Face Mall.

During each visit, the children will have the chance to enjoy personalised shopping, exciting entertainment and different lifestyle experiences designed to bring their heartfelt wishes to life in a joyful, immersive and dignified setting, thereby creating meaningful moments of happiness, connection and lasting memories for the child and their loved ones.

One Galle Face partnered with selected tenants including Burger King, Delifrance, Popeyes, Playdium, Yah Empyrean, Tea Tang, Toytopia, Food Studio, Nolimit, Red N Pink and AVR to contribute discounts, gifts, donations or unique experiences. This partnership with ICT will allow for children with critical Illnesses to enjoy these offerings with their families.

General Manager Sachin Dhanawade stated, “Since its inception, One Galle Face has remained committed to initiatives that create meaningful impact beyond the realm of shopping. Our partnership with the ICT and Make-A-Wish Sri Lanka is a unique opportunity for the One Galle Face team to bring our distinctive experiences to children who need them most. We are grateful to our partners who have come forward to support this meaningful cause and help make this Children’s Day a truly special and memorable one for these children.”

ICT Chairperson Dr. N. Lanka Jayasuriya-Dissanayake added, “At a time when these children and their families are facing numerous challenges, it is heartening to see organisations such as One Galle Face go above and beyond to create a special experience that will help them make memories to last a lifetime. We are thankful to the One Galle Face team and their wonderful tenants who have rallied together to help bring big smiles to the faces of these innocent children.”