Emergency gone, much more to be done

The JVP-NPP government has decided to allow the Emergency regulations to lapse, according to media reports. This is something welcome, but it should have been done months ago. Better late than never. The government has apparently made a virtue of necessity. It incurred public opprobrium and came under heavy pressure to end the protracted state of Emergency, which was declared in the aftermath of the landfall of Cyclone Ditwah towards the end of last year to facilitate disaster management and relief operations.

It is said that Sri Lanka has been under emergency rule for more than three decades since Independence, with the longest, uninterrupted periods occurring during the two JVP uprisings and the Ealam war. There is no political party that did not misuse Emergency regulations to further its interests while in power. Politicians realise the need to protect civil liberties and protest only when they lose power and become victims of the Emergency regulations, which grant governments sweeping powers of arrest and detention.

The JVP-NPP government ought to carry out its promise to abolish the PTA (Prevention of Terrorism Act), which has been abused by successive governments to suppress democratic dissent. President Anura Kumara Dissanayake has recently pledged to do so before the end of this year. It is obvious that the government is planning to replace the PTA with the proposed PSTA (Protection of the State from Terrorism Act), which is as draconian as the PTA.

The PTA and the proposed PSTA are Tweedledum and Tweedledee for all intents and purposes. Various human rights groups, civil society organisations, political activists, the UN and the media have pointed out that the PSTA cannot be accepted as an alternative to the PTA. They have echoed the view of the Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights that the PSTA has not defined terrorism properly, and this fact runs counter to international law. An overly broad definition allows the PSTA to be misused. The PSTA seeks to empower senior police officers to issue detention orders and authorise pre-charge detention for renewable periods of up to two months for a total of up to one year. It has been pointed out by international human rights organisations, such as Amnesty International, that the PSTA seeks to retain untrammelled executive powers; the presidential powers are so extensive that the sole avenue for appeal against Proscription Orders lies with the Executive itself so much so that they undermine the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights. The government ought to discard the proposed PSTA and introduce an anti-terror law that conforms to international best practices.

Similarly, it behoves the government to fulfill its solemn pledge to discontinue the culture of performative arrests, politically determined detentions, and vilification campaigns against suspects. The police arrest suspects even before conducting investigations, much less ascertaining credible evidence, and have the latter detained or remanded for long periods. Thereafter, the police and the Attorney General’s Department slow-walk the legal process. The current practice of looking for evidence after making arrests must end, as it is antithetical to democracy. A stay in overcrowded, squalid Sri Lankan remand prisons is tantamount to punishment in itself. The condition of detention cells in the CID headquarters is even worse, we are told. Hence, no person should be detained or remanded without credible evidence.

Cabinet Spokesman Dr. Nalinda Jayatissa recently sought to justify the detention of former State Intelligence Service Director Maj. Gen. (Retd.) Suresh Sallay in one of the filthy, tiny cells at the CID headquarters. He stated that those cells had been used to detain suspects for a long time, and Sallay could not be given preferential treatment. However, the JVP/NPP came to power, promising to break the so-called 76-year curse, didn’t it?

Previous governments did nothing about the hellholes that prisons and the CID detention cells are, and some of them and their supporters are now languishing in those places. It will be in the present-day leaders’ own interests to do away with the existing draconian laws and improve the conditions of remand prisons and detention facilities, for the boot will be on the other foot after the next regime change.

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.