Bank of Ceylon celebrates 85 years of innovation and inclusion in banking

The Bank of Ceylon, celebrated its 85th Anniversary at a ceremony held at the Bank’s Head Office Colombo 01.The ceremony began with special religious sermons, invoking blessings on the staff and on all customers of the bank. The event held with the patronage of the Bank’s Chairman Kavan Ratnayaka and the General Manager/CEO Russel Fonseka. Members of the bank’s Board of Directors, Corporate and Executive management, staff members, customers and well-wishers were gathered at the head office to celebrate the event. Similarly the Bank’s branch network too celebrated the anniversary along with their loyal customers and well-wishers.

The establishment of the Bank of Ceylon and its opening on the 1st of August 1939 for business by British Governor Sir Andrew Caldecott led to an ordinary person or business opening an account and use cheques in transacting. Since its inception, BOC has stood as a pillar of strength for Sri Lankans, transforming the banking experience for millions. From empowering ordinary citizens with access to financial services to pioneering digital banking solutions, BOC’s journey has been nothing short of remarkable.

Today it is a thoroughly modern bank with technology forming the backbone of its operating infrastructure. Due to our contributions to the banking sector and commitment to delivering exceptional experiences to our valued customers this year, BOC’s dedication to digital excellence was recognised at the Technnovation Awards 2024, where it clinched the coveted ‘Overall Award – Gold for Excellence in Digital Payments.’ Additionally, the bank secured Gold awards for ‘Bank of the Year for Financial Inclusivity’ and ‘Best Common ATM Enabler of the Year,’ among others. These accolades serve as further proof of why we are Sri Lanka’s premier financial institution.

In a year filled with challenges, BOC was also honoured as ‘The Bank of the Year – Sri Lanka’ by the prestigious Banker magazine, reinforcing its position as a resilient and trusted financial partner. Notably, BOC remains the only Sri Lankan bank listed among the Top 1,000 Banks in the world once again in the year 2024, showcasing its sustained growth and customer confidence.

Offshore banking regulations gazetted for banks set to operate at Port City Colombo

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.