Ropewalk Galle makes debut on Asia’s 50 Best Bars - Extended list ranked #93

Ropewalk Galle, the world’s first arrack-speciality bar, has made its debut on Asia’s 50 Best Bars - Extended list ranked #93, the global travel and hospitality platform from the team behind The World’s 50 Best Bars.

The recognition marks another milestone for the bar just over two years since opening, making it the only bar in Galle and the third out of Sri Lanka to be featured on the prestigious platform.

Located within the 300-year-old Galle Fort Hotel in the UNESCO World Heritage-listed Galle Fort, Ropewalk has become synonymous with modern Sri Lankan mixology, celebrating arrack, the island’s indigenous spirit through premium arrack tastings and an ingredient-led cocktail programme.

Home to an arrack wall featuring more than 75 expressions of Sri Lanka’s national spirit, the bar has also been recognised by Condé Nast Traveller India as one of the region’s Top 20 Bars.

Ropewalk continues to push the boundaries of Sri Lankan mixology through an evolving cocktail programme and international collaborations. Signature serves include the Ropewalk, featuring 45-day spice-infused Old Cask Arrack, with sous-vide ginger and lemongrass syrup, Only Nabeel Likes This, a blend of Old Reserve Arrack, kithul treacle and masala tea and Gunpowder, combining Paradise White Arrack with chilli, cucumber, lemongrass and ginger ale.

The bar has also collaborated with internationally acclaimed venues including COA (Hong Kong), The Elephant Room (Singapore), BARC (Kathmandu) and AMPM (Kolkata), further positioning Sri Lankan arrack on the global cocktail stage.

“From the beginning, our vision was to create a destination in this historic Galle Fort, that celebrates Sri Lankan arrack with the same respect afforded to the world’s great spirits. Being recognised by Asia’s Best 50 Bars is an important moment not only for Ropewalk but for Sri Lankan bar culture. We hope this recognition encourages more travellers to discover the history, craftsmanship and versatility behind our indigenous spirit and the camaraderie, joy and warmth it fosters,” said Ropewalk founder Amrit Rajaratnam.

Ropewalk is part of Island Life – Sri Lanka, a homegrown boutique hotel chain that includes Galle Fort Hotel (11 suites), The Warden’s House (four suites) and Thotalagala (seven suites) – three distinct properties that reflect the diversity of the island, from its historic coastal enclaves to its wildlife-rich south and the quiet tea-covered hills, each offering a deeply rooted sense of place and experience. Umi Hiriketiya, the group’s fourth boutique hotel, opens in October 2026.