President to get tough on indisciplined monks

Colombo, May 28 (Daily Mirror) - Claiming that he is prepared to take action against any moves to destroy Buddhism even within the Buddhist clergy, President Anura Kumara Dissanayake said yesterday the government will amend the the Buddhist Temporalities Ordinance to establish Buddhist Council in order to discipline Buddhist clergy.

Inaugurating the National Vesak Festival in Matara, he said amendments to Sections 41 and 42 of the Buddhist Temporalities Ordinance have been drafted and that discussions have been held with the Attorney General and the representatives of the Mahanayaka Theras of all Chapters and Commissioner General Of Buddhist Affairs on the amendments adding that they had come to a consensus on the amendments.

The President said Buddhist monks had taken great pain and commitment to preserve and pass down the teachings of the Buddha to the present generation and assured to pass laws required to ensure that Buddhist clergy are well-disciplined.

"We all have a responsibility to protect Buddhism. We have observed that situations have emerged where Buddhism is being distorted under the pretext of Buddhism. What can rulers do about it? We are ready to take action. We need the support of disciplined and educated monks for that. We all have a responsibility to protect Buddhism. I invite everyone to get together and work towards that. I do not like the decisions and actions taken to protect Buddhism being termed as political or government decisions. I like those decisions and actions being termed as decisions taken for the sake of Buddhism and future of Buddhism," he said.

He said economic revival in the past is interconnected with religious revival adding that the government's wish is also to create economic revival together with religious revival.

Venerable Omalpe Sobitha Thera said some individuals in robes are destroying Buddhism, discipline and Buddhist places and said President Anura Kumara Dissanayake must intervene to prevent it just as ancient kings had done to protect Buddhism.

The Thera said Sections 41 and 42 of the Buddhist Temporalities Ordinance must be amended to suit the Buddhist monks adding that the situation will prevail until a Sanga Council is established.

He said a visible and invisible elements are operating in national and international level to destroy Buddhism.