No visa fee change for Sri Lankan pilgrims, India clarifies

The High Commission of India in Colombo has clarified that there has been no change in the visa fee policy for Sri Lankan pilgrims travelling to India, while announcing the reintroduction of the free (Gratis) visa facility for eligible pilgrimage groups.

In a statement issued today (24), the High Commission said it remains committed to ensuring the timely and smooth issuance of visas to all Sri Lankan citizens, noting that Sri Lanka is among the countries whose citizens are eligible to apply for India’s e-visa facility.

It stated that Sri Lankans who choose to apply through the High Commission are required to submit their applications online and lodge them at Indian Consular Application Centres (ICAC), located in Colombo, Kandy, Jaffna, Hambantota and Batticaloa.

Addressing concerns regarding visas for pilgrims, including those visiting Buddhist religious sites in India, the High Commission said such visas are facilitated and issued swiftly.

It said that where applications are recommended by the Ministry of Buddhasasana, Religious and Cultural Affairs, free visas are issued for groups of 10 or more pilgrims.

However, this practice was temporarily discontinued due to a change in the visa outsourcing agency handling applications for the High Commission.

“Subsequent to the selection of the new service provider, which has started working from 07 July 2026, the practice of issuing Gratis visas for Sri Lankans on pilgrimage is being reintroduced,” the statement said.

The High Commission added that pilgrimage visa requests should continue to be forwarded through the Ministry of Buddhasasana, Religious and Cultural Affairs, and applications can be submitted as groups of 10 or more.

Applicants are required to visit ICAC either as a group or individually for biometric collection, as mandated under new regulations introduced by the Government of India. However, biometric registration is only required for applicants between the ages of 12 and 70.

The High Commission also said a special expedited process has been introduced for senior citizens visiting ICAC for biometric procedures to minimise waiting times.

“Capturing biometrics will ensure that their passage through Indian Immigration on arrival in India is smooth and convenient,” it said.

Clarifying further, the High Commission said there is no visa fee applicable for Sri Lankan pilgrims whose applications are submitted through the prescribed procedure.

However, applicants are required to pay a visa service fee of Rs. 1,855 to the Indian Consular Application Centres for processing services.