Standard Chartered launches life-changing Goal Accelerator project for disadvantaged young women

Standard Chartered Sri Lanka CEO Bingumal Thewarathanthri handing over the ceremonial cheque to SERVE Executive Director Sanjeeva de Mel

With the intention of empowering disadvantaged young women in the country, Standard Chartered Sri Lanka has launched the next iteration of Goal, the Goal Accelerator, a three-year employability project, dubbed ‘Sashreeka’ in collaboration with SERVE, the local implementing partner and Women Win, a global multi-dimensional women’s fund.

Funded by a $ 600,000 donation from the Standard Chartered Foundation, the Sashreeka project aims to benefit 450 young women, aged 18-35 years, from low socio-economic backgrounds living in the Colombo, Gampaha, and Kalutara districts. The initiative is designed to be inclusive, with 10% of the total target being young women who are differently abled.

The primary goal is to help these disadvantaged young women secure and maintain decent employment or initiate and sustain their own small businesses, ultimately achieving economic independence.

Standard Chartered Sri Lanka Head of Corporate Affairs, Brand and Marketing Anuk De Silva commented: “We are proud to introduce Sashreeka, a life-changing project that will create pathways to economic independence for disadvantaged young women in Sri Lanka. Combining leadership development, economic empowerment, sports-based rights and life skills programing, we are confident that this initiative will have a lasting impact on the lives of the participants.”

The project’s holistic approach focuses on addressing multifaceted challenges faced by these young women. It includes tailored interventions, such as vocational training, self-employment opportunities, financial literacy sessions, and personalised coaching and mentorship to support the participants in achieving financial health and independence.

SERVE Executive Director Sanjeeva de Mel said: “We are excited to embark on this journey with Standard Chartered. Sashreeka goes beyond traditional employability programs. It is a significant step in supporting disadvantaged young women in Sri Lanka, providing them with the tools, tailored interventions, and ongoing support needed to achieve economic independence and personal growth, creating a holistic pathway towards a successful future.”

The Sashreeka project’s unique incorporation of sports and play serves as a central component, recognising the progressive impact of these activities in developing key transferable skills, building self-confidence, and improving mental health. Each participant will receive a customised career acceleration plan with continuous business development coaching to ensure sustainable progress.