Aitken Spence shines at Top50 Professional and Career Women Global Awards with four prestigious wins

Aitken Spence PLC proudly announced a remarkable achievement at the 15th Top50 Professional and Career Women Global Awards 2025, hosted by Women in Management (WIM).

Stasshani Jayawardena, Chairperson of Aitken Spence PLC, was recognised with the coveted ‘Trailblazing Corporate Leader’ award, celebrating her visionary leadership and transformative impact on the corporate landscape.

In the Career Excellence category, there were two awards – Dilrukshi Kudaliyanage, Assistant Vice President – Operations & Administration, Aitken Spence Aviation (Pvt) Ltd., award for ‘Women in Aviation and Leadership’ and Stephanie Rahaman, General Manager – Corporate Communication & Stakeholder Strategy, Aitken Spence Group, award for ‘Media & Communication Professional’.

Further underscoring the Group’s commitment to gender equity and inclusive leadership, Aitken Spence Logistics was awarded ‘Best Corporate for Women Leadership’ under the Corporate & Organizational Excellence category.

These accolades reflect the company’s unwavering dedication to empowering women leaders and fostering a culture of excellence, innovation, and inclusivity across its diverse business sectors.

Stasshani Jayawardena commented, “I am deeply honoured to receive the ‘Trailblazing Corporate Leader’ award. This recognition is a testament not only to my journey but to the collective strength, resilience, and brilliance of every woman who dares to lead, to challenge convention, and to uplift others along the way. I am proud to stand alongside my colleagues and be part of a team where women are not only empowered but celebrated for their courage, innovation, and impact”.

Women in Management (WIM), the organiser of the awards, is a globally recognised platform that champions women’s leadership, entrepreneurship, and advocacy. With chapters across the Maldives, Malaysia, the UK, Africa, and Canada, WIM continues to spotlight and celebrate the achievements of women who are shaping the future.

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.