Oktoberfest… lots of action in the scene here

Oktoberfest is a world-famous German festival and is celebrated annually, generally from late September to early October, and there’s going to be plenty of action in our part of the world, as well.

Most venues in Colombo are gearing up for the Oktoberfest celebrations, with Cinnamon Lakeside planning to give their event a typical Oktoberfest atmosphere … and with all the traditions, as well.

Suzi Flückiger, now residing in Switzerland, and is better known as Suzi Croner to her fans in Sri Lanka, is expected shortly, with a Swiss outfit, for this festival, and will be doing the needful at Cinnamon Lakeside.

In order to create the real Oktoberfest scene, a 14-member crew will be arriving from Switzerland, comprising eight hostesses, a five-piece band, and, of course, Suzi, and they will move into action, from the 23rd to the 28th of September, at the Cinnamon Lakeside.

Says Suzi: “I will be singing with the Willy Schere band German songs (Oktoberfest style, she emphasised) and also as a solo guest singer.”

Suzi went on to say that the atmosphere will be similar to an Oktoberfest held in Germany.

“The hostesses will be dressed in the appropriate style associated with this German festival and we will also be doing all the Oktoberfest rituals.

“It will be a special kind of music – traditional music and dancing, with accordion and all the paraphernalia needed to make this Oktoberfest event truly memorable.”

Suzi, too, will be a big attraction as she known for her explosive vocals and captivating stage presence.

In fact, she is extremely popular in Melbourne, as well, and will be heading for Australia, in October, for her annual country night performance.

Suzi rose to fame as the lead vocalist of the popular Sri Lankan band Friends, which had a massive following, especially in the ’90s and early 2000s.

Friends had a fan club, in Colombo, with over 1,500 members, showcasing their immense popularity.

In Switzerland, Suzi generally performs as a solo artiste but she did the Oktoberfest scene, in Switzerland, with a Swiss trio, on 13th September.

The following outfits will also be seen in action at the Cinnamon Lakeside Oktoberfest: OIC, Taxi, Redeemers, Magic Box Mixup, Doctor and Warehouse Project.

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.