‘Elada Braa’ … her debut movie

Achini Hansamali is a popular figure on social media, especially as a photographic model, and she is also a very keen reader of The Island newspaper.

In fact, she has appeared in our Glam Scene and has also been featured in our Chit-Chat column.

In 2023, she was crowned Miss Sri Lanka For Queen Of The Islands.

Well, Achini is in the news again and this time the spotlight is on her debut film ‘Elada Braa.’

Says Achini: I recently had the privilege of being part of the film ‘Elada Braa,’ where I played the role of ‘Saara’. This was my first film experience, and it was a memorable one.

“As ‘Saara’, I may have had limited screen time, but the experience was invaluable. I feel honoured to have acted alongside incredibly talented senior artists who made this journey unforgettable.”

From a 21-year-old newcomer to being part of this project, Achini says she feels blessed.

“The journey began over a year ago, and I believe I did my best as ‘Saara,’ despite it being my very first experience. I was really nervous, but I was very happy, too, as I was fortunate to work with senior artists, which was a great learning experience for me.”

Despite being a comedy, Achini went on to say that ‘Elada Braa’ has a beautifully crafted story that makes it suitable for all family members to watch together, adding “and, funnily enough, my character was something like a gangster lady.”

According to Achini, the makeup artists did an exceptional job, transforming her with a wig that looked incredibly realistic.

“My character’s look was so convincing that many people asked if I had cut my long hair for the role!

“As a model, I’m used to working in front of the camera for photoshoots and fashion shows, but acting in a film was a different experience altogether. It wasn’t easy, but I hope I did my best as ‘Saara’.”

When she was crowned Miss Sri Lanka For Queen OfThe Islands 2023

This experience has sparked a desire in her to explore more acting opportunities, especially in films where she can play diverse and challenging characters, she says.

“I’d love to take on roles that push my creative boundaries and allow me to grow as an actor. If teledramas offer interesting characters that resonate with me, I’d consider them as well.”

“Seeing myself on the big screen, for the first time, was a dream come true,

“Moreover, watching the film with my parents was a special moment. They’ve always supported and encouraged me to pursue my passions, and I’m grateful for their presence in my life.

“I also need to mention that I owe my selection for this film to Director Pujitha Senarathne Gunathilaka, and it was also a pleasure working with Pubudu Chathuranga, who was very humble throughout the shoot.

The premiere of ‘Elada Braa’ was 28th August, 2025, at the Roxy Cinema, in Wellawatte.

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.