Sri Lanka Insurance recognizes top sales achievers at Star Awards 2022

Sri Lanka Insurance, the largest and strongest Insurer in the insurance industry, recently hosted its Star Awards 2022 at the Monarch Imperial. The prestigious event served as a platform to commend and celebrate the remarkable achievements of the top sales performers for their outstanding contributions throughout the year 2022.

Over 300 of the best achievers across all categories i.e. Life, Motor and Non-Motor, were honored with awards and recognitions for the titles of Best Sales Personnel, Best Team Leaders, Best Group Leaders and Best Branch Managers, Best Regional managers and Best Insurance Advisors were recognized and rewarded, under the respective business categories. The special award for the 15 best achievers were also presented with the ‘Best of the Best’ recognition, under each category.

All Island Best Regional Sales Manager (Life) – Mr. Prasanna Saman Kumara , All Island Best Regional Sales Manager (General Insurance) – T.S.K. Peiris, All Island Best Branch (Life) – Negombo Branch, All Island Best Branch Manager (General Insurance) – Ms. H. N. P. Udayakumari, All Island Best Life Insurance Advisor / MDRT – Top of the Table (TOT) Member – G.A.A. Piyarathna, All Island Best Team Leader – Mr. P.S.J. Silva, All Island Best Motor Insurance Advisor – E.S. Fernando, All Island Best Non Motor Insurance Advisor – U.G. Saman, All Island Best Marketing Executive (Non FBD) – R.M.P.D.K. Rajakaruna, All Island Best Marketing Executive (FBD) – A.K.C. Rodrigo, All Island Best Individual Sales Personnel (Head office & Corporate Lines) – Ms. A. Jayawardena, All Island Best Supervisor (Head office & Corporate Lines) – Mr. Ravi Medis, All Island Best Insurance Advisor Motor (Consecutive Award) – Mr. E.S. Fernando and All Island Best General Insurance Advisor (Consecutive Award) – M.N. Gunathilaka were awarded and recognised at the event for their exemplary work and commitment showcased throughout the year 2022.

Over 650 SLIC personnel including Chairman, Board of Directors, CEO and the corporate management attended the event. The event also felicitated members of the Platinum Star Club and Platinum Club.

SLT-MOBITEL ‘One Shot ULTRA’ offers ultimate unlimited voice and data experience to mobile users

Sri Lanka Insurance embarks on a new era: Legal segregation marks a historic milestone

Sri Lanka Insurance emerged winners at the ‘Great HR Quiz 2023’

Sri Lanka Insurance emerges winner at the ‘Great HR Quiz 2023’

Sri Lanka Insurance Achieves Milestone with ISO/IEC 27001:2013 Certification for Information Security Management

Sri Lanka Insurance achieves milestone with ISO/IEC 27001: 2013 Certification for Information Security Management

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.