.LK Domain Registry recognises dynamic websites promoting SL identity in cyberspace

The widely subscribed .lk Domain Registry hosted a gala event at the Cinnamon Grand Hotel on 14th August 2024, where Sri Lanka’s best talent in web designing and development were recognised. The event celebrated talent, success and achievement within schools, academic institutions, government institutions, banks and private sector corporations in a way that encourages them to perform even better in the future.

ITN Chairman Sudarshana Gunawardena, who was the chief guest of the event said, “The annual best web awards is a significant milestone for the digital landscape as it celebrates the innovative spirit and outstanding performance of the web presence of the participating entities of both public and private sectors.”

“This is a competition where the judges put emphasis on how you use creativity and the power of technology to connect, communicate and collaborate for the greater success of your institutions and organizations.”

“We can see that your passion for pushing the boundaries to accomplish what is possible in the digital realm and go to greater heights which is truly inspiring. I commend each and everyone of you for your contribution to the vibrant online communication in Sri Lanka. This competition conducted by .LK Domain Registry serves as a platform to showcase the best of Sri Lankan web designing and development, highlighting the diverse talents and innovative approaches that make the country’s digital landscape so dynamic and exciting. It is a testimony to the creativity and integrity and the potential of your success in the field of digital communication. You are harnessing the power of Internet to connect people from all walks of life to share knowledge and ideas to drive positive change in Sri Lanka and beyond. It’s an honour for the ITN to be the electronic media partner of the competition since 2014.”

Damindra Ratnayake, Chairman LK Domain Registry said,” This competition and the awards ceremony began in 2009. I am happy to see that we had almost 500 applications, and we have 109 award winners. It shows a growing interest for this event. Our exercise is to take Sri Lanka to the world. Those who hold .lk domains present a powerful image to the world about their organizations and are flourishing in their performances.”

Gihan Dias,Domain Registrar at LK Domain Registry who is widely recognised as Father of Internet in Sri Lanka said,” We are going to further improve the speed of the domain soon. We will have a new feature to enable updates such as resource records, address records and so on. It will soon be automated, and it will be available by the end of this month. With that, any changes made on your domains will be activated within a few minutes.”

SLT-MOBITEL partners with Sri Dalada Perahara for 10th consecutive year

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.