AMDT School of Creativity receives prestigious Silver Award at Pearson UK Higher Education Awards

AMDT School of Creativity, one of Sri Lanka’s leading educational institutions for creative arts and design, was recently honoured with the “Silver Award for Top Performing Centre” at the prestigious Pearson UK Higher Education Awards held at The Kingsbury, Colombo. This recognition highlights AMDT’s unwavering commitment to excellence and its exemplary performance as a Pearson BTEC International Centre.

The Silver Award was presented to AMDT School of Creativity by Ms. Premilla Paulraj, Regional Director (Asia), Pearson Edexcel (UK), and Mr. Suriya Bibile, Territory Manager (Sri Lanka and Maldives), Pearson Edexcel (UK). The Award was graciously accepted on behalf of AMDT by Satheesh Kumar – Founder, Creative Director, Director – Brands & Technology and Senior Lecturer; Vinodi Jayawardene – Founder, Creative Director, Director – Academics & Operations and Senior Lecturer; Asmath Hanaan – Art Director, Team Lead – Brands & Marketing and Lecturer; and Qassan Naseem – Head of Academic Affairs and Lecturer.

As a Pearson BTEC approved Centre, AMDT has consistently demonstrated outstanding achievements, earning acclaim as an internationally award-winning creative campus. This recent accolade follows a series of previous successes, including the Partner Excellence Award in 2017 and consecutive Performance Excellence Awards in 2018, 2019, and 2020.

Satheesh Kumar – Founder, Creative Director, Director – Brands & Technology and Senior Lecturer said, “We are absolutely thrilled to receive the Silver Award from Pearson UK. This accolade is a testament to the relentless creativity, hard work, and passion of our students and faculty. At AMDT School of Creativity, we strive to push the boundaries of Creative education, and this recognition fuels our drive to innovate and inspire the next generation of Creative leaders.”

Australia and Sri Lanka further strengthen ties with launch of new joint maritime security operation

AMDT School of Creativity – A Gateway to World-Class Education in Creative Arts and Design in Sri Lanka

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.