A Southern Voice, a Northern Story:

Uthuru Konç Arumasia (The Wonder at the Northern Corner), a book in Sinhala language by Dr. Viduni Basnayake, was launched on Sunday, January 25, 2026, at the Auditorium of the Clinical Research and Training Block (CTRB), Faculty of Medicine, University of Jaffna. The event was co-organised by the Medical Students’ Union, Student Wellbeing Centre, and the Department of Community and Family Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, University of Jaffna.

Dr. Basnayake is a proud alumna of the Jaffna Medical Faculty. She graduated in January 2025 and is currently completing her internship at Teaching Hospital Jaffna. Originally from Kandy, her first Sinhala book, Uthuru Konç Arumasia (The Wonder at the Northern Corner) was born in late 2019, during her second year of medical studies. It is a heartfelt chronicle of the six unforgettable years (2019-2024) she spent as a medical student walking through the Northern Peninsula.

Through lived experience, careful observation, reflective inquiry and emotion, Dr. Basnayake invites the reader to journey alongside her across an extraordinary range of themes—from the Jaffna train and the historic Jaffna Fort to Delft Island, Point Pedro and Mannar; from the region’s rich food, culture, to the remnants of King Sangiliyan’s kingdom; from vintage cars and the donkeys of Mannar, to the legacy of American missionaries; from Nallur and other sacred temples to the iconic Jaffna Library, and much more. The prose goes beyond sharing information. With a rhythmic quality, blending poetry and vivid imagery, the book traces, step by step, landscapes and lives, memories and quiet transformations that define the region beyond what is often seen or spoken.

The book is written from the gaze of the “Visitor to Jaffna” – at times this visitor is Dr. Basnayake herself; you see the geographical and social landscape of the North through her eyes. In other instances, the text speaks to the “Visitor to Jaffna” (here the Visitor is from the South; woven across the narrative is a comparison between ways of life in Jaffna and the South, most notably her home town, Kandy). Through her voice, Dr. Basnayake lures the Southern reader away from mainstream narratives and divisive rhetoric, redirecting them to the lives of ordinary Jaffna people–the farmers, fishers, toddy tappers, and others. In beautifully blending history with the present, the text draws on historical sources, interspersed with folk tale, poetry and conversation. It quietly questions the appearance—and fragility—of tranquility, in the North.

The book launch was well attended, with over 100 persons present. After the welcome address by Prof. R. Surenthirakumaran, Dean, Faculty of Medicine, University of Jaffna, the author shared her motivation for writing the book, while gratefully acknowledging her parents and sister, who were present at this joyous occasion. Dr. Basnayake thanked her parents for their quiet but powerful presence in her life, and their unwavering trust in her work and the freedom they gave her to make her life decisions.

Next, the author was felicitated by Prof. Gitanjali Sathiadas, Chair Professor of Paediatrics, Department of Paediatrics, University of Jaffna, who was also invited to receive the first book. Following the presentation of the book to many others present, including staff of the University and Teaching Hospital Jaffna, the 45th Batch of medical students took to the stage, performing a spirited fusion dance, keeping with the book’s theme.

In the final section of the programme, three reviewers were invited to speak about the book. The first was Mr. Swaminathan Vimal, a Senior Lecturer in Linguistics and former Head of the Department of Linguistics & English at the University of Jaffna–a noted academic specializing in Tamil-Sinhala comparative literature and phonological studies. Next, was Ms. Sharmila Vinothini, a journalist and currently Production Manager at IBC Tamil Television. Recipient of the State Literary Award on multiple occasions, she is a close friend of Dr. Basnayake, reflecting a professional and personal association formed during the author’s years in Jaffna. The third speaker was Dr. Ramya Kumar, Senior Lecturer, Department of Community and Family Medicine, University of Jaffna, who has been a teacher and mentor to the author.

The evening ended with a vote of thanks and tribute to Dr. Basnayake by Mr. A. Dilothaman, Secretary of the Medical Students’ Union, Faculty of Medicine, University of Jaffna.

The book is available for online purchase at Grantha.lk or for onsite purchase at the Grantha bookshop at 6A/39,New Galle Road, Koralawella, Moratuwa and bookshops island wide.

[This article was compiled by Ramya Kumar with input from Viduni Basnayake; photo credit to Lenscope, Medical Students’ Union, Faculty of Medicine, University of Jaffna].

Pathfinder Foundation charts roadmap for Sri Lanka’s critical minerals sector

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.