US-based Fluke Calibrations selects Marlbo Trading to distribute their products in Sri Lanka

Every new manufacturing plant, hospital, or key industrial facility built today as well as the existing testing laboratories looking to upgrade will become potential customers for Fluke calibration products. In such a context, we see a lot of potential customers here in Sri Lanka as the country’s economy is stabilising and showing signs of economic growth, said Sridharan Parthasarathy, Director Fluke Calibration at a press conference held at Taj Samudra Colombo last week.

He made this comment as the US-based Fluke has expanded their partnership with their Sri Lankan partner – Marlbo Trading Company as one of their channel partners, so that Sri Lankan organizations can now purchase Fluke Calibration equipment from Marlbo trading Company.

“From industrial electronic installation, maintenance and service to precision measurement and quality control, Fluke tools help keep business and industry around the globe up and running. Typical customers and users include technicians, engineers, metrologists, medical-device manufacturers, defence sector, aviation sector, food sector — and other sectors that stake their reputations on their tools, and use tools to enhance the precision processes in their organisations will be keen on purchasing our products,” he said.

“When you purchase calibration equipment from Fluke Calibration, you know you are getting the most accurate and dependable products you can find for your metrology and instrument calibration requirements,” he noted.

Working in process environments such as power and energy, petroleum, pharmaceuticals, or food and beverage manufacturing can be challenging work. Maintaining, building, and calibrating process equipment takes specific expertise and often requires specialized process calibrators to get the job done right. With the broadest line of process calibration equipment in the industry, Fluke with the distribution network of Marlbo can help provide you with the right calibration tools for the challenges you face every day,” M. Maniymuthu, Proprietor- Marlbo Trading Company said.

Following the press conference, a seminar/technical presentation was held at the Taj Samudra Hotel for engineers, lab managers, research engineers, heads of departments, Deans and technical managers to gain knowledge of various calibration methodologies and emerging technologies.

CFA Society Sri Lanka to celebrate capital markets excellence on June 18

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.