Eric J. De Silva

Eric J. De Silva who passed away recently at the age of nearly 90 was one of the outstanding public servants of his generation. Having joined the Ceylon Civil Service in 1960 he had a wide ranging career in Colombo and in the districts. Later in his career he specialized in the field of education, both locally and abroad, and working for the United Nations.

Eric had his early education at Mahinda College, Galle. He entered the University of Ceylon at Peradeniya in 1954, specializing in Economics, and obtaining an honours degree. He initially joined the Elections Department as an Assistant Elections Officer. In 1960 he entered the Ceylon Civil Service. One of his early assignments was with the Ministry of Defence and External affairs as Assistant Secretary. The permanent Secretary at the time was N.Q. Dias. Later, in the 1970s he worked as Senior Assistant Secretary in the same Ministry. The Prime Minister Mrs. Sirimavo Bandaranayaka who was also the Minister of Defence and External affairs had a high regard for him.

Eric served as Government Agent Trincomalee sometime later. This was at a time of civil disturbance in most parts of the island. District Coordinating Officers were appointed to many districts. In almost all cases these were Military officers, placed above the civilian Government Agents. The one exception was Eric who was appointed the Coordinating Officer for Trincomalee district. Most likely this was due to his previous experience in the Ministry of Defence. Eric later served as the Head of the Sri Lanka Institute of Development Administration (SLIDA).

In the 1970s, Eric virtually started on a new career path. He was appointed as Secretary to the Ministry of Education and the Minister was Ranil Wickramasinghe. He took several initiatives to bring about educational reform. Several committees were appointed to examine key aspects of the education system. Eric was particularly anxious to bring the university academic community specializing in education to work with the Ministry. With this in mind, he brought in many academics to the education reform committees that were established. Later in life, he published a book on his time at the Ministry of Education. Eric was recruited by UNDP to serve as a consultant on education and he worked in several countries in the Asian region. After retirement he wrote brief memoir of his time in the public service.

In conclusion, let me add a personal note. Eric and I joined Mahinda College Galle in 1947 and we were there until 1954. Then from 1955 to 1958, we were at the University of Ceylon, Peradeniya and at Ramanathan Hall. Both of us read for a degree in Economics. Much later in life, when I had returned from a period of 30 years abroad, we connected with each other. Our teacher and mentor at Mahinda College in the 1950s had been the late C.G.L. (Cadmus) Samarasinghe, who had been a great influence in our lives. He was then living in retirement at his rural home in Baddegama (near Galle). Almost every half year, we visited him, along with a few contemporary friends, to spend the day, and reminisce on our life and times.

Central bank gold holdings are at a 50year high. What’s behind the jump in reserves?

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.