Sri Lanka’s UNP scoffs at SJB v NPP debate, calls it ‘battle of empty rhetoric’

ECONOMYNEXT — Sri Lanka President Ranil Wickremesinghe’s United National Party (UNP) has dismissed a proposed debate between its rivals Samagi Jana Balawegaya (SJB) and National People’s Power (NPP) as a battle of empty rhetoric.

UNP general secretary Palitha Range Bandara told reporters on Wednesday April 17 that the two opposition parties, having shirked their responsibility in taking up the challenge of governing the country at the height of the 2022 financial crisis, is now talking about a debate once the hard work of stabilising the economy has already been done by a UNP president.

“Two sides that engage in empty rhetoric are about to get on a stage. We can see that. It’s a battle of empty rhetoric. It’s not about developing the country,” said Bandara.

Asked about the proposal for a debate between the SJB’s and the NPP’s economic councils, the former MP said: “If there is a team with such profound knowledge on the economy, why did they not take up the job?”

“When the nation was in flames in 2022 they were officially invited to take it up. They evaded that and now talking about a debate. What debate is there after that?”

“There are many with a lot to say after the country has been built, but the problem is there is no one to do the building,” he added.

The SJB and the NPP have been engaged in a war of words over the proposed debate, which has yet to materialise. Each party has accused the other of avoiding the matter.

NPP member and All Ceylon Farmers Federation Convener Namal Karunaratne scoffed at the suggestion of a debate.

“What debates with the SJB? There is nothing to debate here. Who ran this country? Who is the SJB? It is the United National Party (UNP). All we can say to them is to get lost (bambu gaha ganna kiyanan),” he said.

The SJB has appointed MP Nalin Bandara to coordinate the proposed debate between the two party leaders. Bandara said in a statement the SJB would like to hold the debate sometime in May. However, a date must be first set for an preliminary debate between the two parties’ economic councils, after which a debate can be held between the two leaders.

The NPP, on the other hand, has claimed that it was in fact their leader Dissanayake that first challenged Premadasa for a debate. NPP senior Nalinda Jayatissa has reportedly said that this was as early as last year.

The party has named Jayatissa as its coordinator for the proposed debate.

JVP general secretary Tilvin Silva said last week that the SJB must inform the NPP in writing of its intention to debate. (Colombo/Apr17/2024)