VFS Global and NCPC launch youth skilling programme to boost Sri Lanka’s tourism talent

VFS Global, a global leader in trusted technology services, has launched the Tourism Skilling Programme in association with NCPC Sri Lanka and the ASSIST Development Foundation. The initiative aims to empower local youth with industry-relevant skills to support the country’s fast-growing tourism sector.

The programme was inaugurated on 14 July in Galle, in the presence of K A N Pramodini, Deputy Director, Galle Municipal Corporation; Nihaal D’silva, Assistant Director, Centre for Environmental Authority and Upali Rathnayaka, Deputy Director General, Sri Lanka Tourism Authority.

Sri Lanka’s tourism sector is experiencing a strong growth with the tourist arrivals for the first six months of 2025 recording over 1.16 million which represents a 15.6 per cent increase compared to the same period last year. This encouraging momentum highlights the country’s growing appeal on the global stage. As visitor numbers rise, so does the need for a skilled workforce to deliver world-class experiences.

Recognising this exciting opportunity and drawing on its deep expertise in the sector, VFS Global and its partners have curated a specialised programme to nurture local talent and strengthen the industry’s capacity. This initiative aims to empower the next generation of hospitality professionals and support the continued growth and evolution of Sri Lanka’s vibrant tourism landscape.

Yummi Talwar, Chief Operating Officer, South Asia, VFS Global, said, “We believe in the power of community partnerships to drive sustainable development. Through this programme, we aim to support young people and professionals in the tourism sector by helping them develop skills in eco and cultural tourism, digital marketing, and essential soft skills, delivered through classroom training and hands-on industry exposure. We are proud to collaborate with NCPC Sri Lanka and ASSIST Development Foundation, who bring the technical know-how, deep local expertise and community engagement to this effort.”

SLIIT among world’s Top 20 architecture schools – ranked No. 1 in Sri Lanka

Lanka Realty Investments land deal gives CSE a measure of revival

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.