New Anthoney’s Farms sets industry benchmark as first poultry producer to obtain FSSC 22000 certification

New Anthoney’s Farms Chairman Emil Stanley (third from left) receiving the certification from officials of SGS Lanka

Marking yet another milestone in its unwavering commitment towards providing trusted, hygienic, fresh, and quality chicken famous for its ‘green’ label, New Anthoney’s Farms became the first poultry producer in Sri Lanka to obtain the prestigious internationally recognised FSSC 22000 certification.

This achievement reflects well on how New Anthoney’s Farms strives to not just uphold but go beyond the norm to ensure that consumers enjoy the safest chicken available out there in the market.

By adopting FSSC 22000 certification, the company sets a new industry benchmark and marks a significant stride in ensuring the highest standards of quality, safety, and sustainability in the poultry industry, and now invites other poultry producers to follow suit to enhance quality and build trust and resilience in the entire supply chain.

New Anthoney’s Farms Ltd. CEO Neil Suraweera expressed his gratitude to the team, partners, and customers for their unwavering support throughout this transformative process, and that he looks forward to setting new benchmarks in the industry and continuing to provide poultry products that are of the highest standard in the market. SGS Lanka played a pivotal role for New Anthoney’s Farms in attaining this certification.

Customers can now be confident in their choice of Anthoney’s products, knowing they adhere to the highest standards of quality and safety. The FSSC 22000 certification not only elevates the brand domestically but also facilitates increased exports, expanding the reach of New Anthoney’s Farms to international markets.

New Anthoney’s Group is no stranger in its effort in embracing ethical and sustainable practices. Last year, it was awarded the rights to use the prestigious ‘Sustainable U.S. Soy’ logo on their packaging, displaying a holistic commitment towards sourcing sustainable ingredients, making it the first in the South Asian and Sub-Saharan Africa region, and many others followed suit thereon.

New Anthoney’s Farms is the only producer in the island with the Greenhouse Gas (GHG) Verification Statement from Control Union in accordance with its ISO 14064-1:2018 standards. It also took the industry lead to adopt biodegradable packaging in its chicken products since 2019. New Anthoney’s Group is only growing stronger, with various expansion in its end-to-end poultry value chain, including processed food. New Anthoney’s Group follows standards of the National Chicken Council, USA, and has GMP, HACCP, ISO 22000, local and international halal certifications.