Lanka Impact Investing Network and ICBT launch Youth Startup Challenge 1.0

Lanka Impact Investing Network General Manager Vishwanath Gunawardena (fourth from right) exchanging the MoU with ICBT CEO and Executive Director/Executive Dean of ICBT Campus Dr. Sampath Kannangara, in the presence of (from left): Lanka Impact Investing Network Executive Business Development and Partnerships Supeshala Samarawitharana, Executive Entrepreneurship Development Iresha Perera, ICBT Campus General Manager Sampath Perera, Chief Academic Officer Chandru Sandrasekaran, and Senior Lecturer and Student Placement Officer Anuruddha Yapa

In a transformative collaboration dedicated to fostering entrepreneurship among the youth, Lanka Impact Investing Network (LIIN) and International College of Business and Technology (ICBT) proudly announce the formalisation of a historic Memorandum of Understanding (MoU).

This pivotal agreement, signed by ICBT Campus CEO and Executive Director/Executive Dean Dr. Sampath Kannangara and Lanka Impact Investing Network General Manager Vishwanath Gunawa-rdena marks the commencement of the REVAMP Sri Lanka initiative.

This visionary partnership aims to empower and uplift aspiring young entrepreneurs in Sri Lanka by establishing a dynamic bridge between academic excellence and industry relevance. Under the stewardship of LIIN, REVAMP Sri Lanka became the cornerstone for connecting young innovators with industry leaders, experienced mentors, and potential investors. The primary focus of this alliance, a commitment to fostering an inclusive and equitable entrepreneurship ecosystem for the youth in Sri Lanka, is to offer unparalleled opportunities, mentorship, and resources to emerging entrepreneurs, thus nurturing a vibrant and resilient entrepreneurial landscape in Sri Lanka.

The MoU signing ceremony, graced by prominent figures signifies a significant leap forward in nurturing youth entrepreneurship.

ICBT Campus’ Dr. Sampath Kannangara said: “We are delighted to collaborate with Lanka Impact Investing Network in this ground breaking initiative, with a laser focus on young entrepreneurs. We firmly believe that such partnerships can cultivate innovation and empower the next generation of business leaders, contributing to a dynamic and resilient entrepreneurial ecosystem in Sri Lanka.”

The MoU signing unfolded as part of the grand unveiling of the REVAMP Sri Lanka - Youth Startup Challenge 1.0, underscoring LIIN’s commitment to instil an entrepreneurial spirit among the youth and contribute to the economic revitalisation of the country through an inclusive lens.

This collaborative effort, generously funded by the Government of Canada through the World University Service of Canada (WUSC), underscores the dedication of LIIN and ICBT Campus to empower the youth, drive innovation, and contribute to the economic growth of Sri Lanka.