Sri Lanka Port City tower with clock to ‘rival Big Ben’ gets tax holiday

ECONOMYNEXT – Sri Lanka has given a 25-year tax holiday to Clothespin Management and Development (Private) Limited, which plans to build a ‘twin tower marvel’ that will have clock tower bigger than the Big Ben.

No mention was made of the promoters of Clothespin Management and Development (Private) Limited.

Clothespin Management and Development (Private) Limited will invest 540 million dollars with 75 million dollars for land lease, and 465 million going for construction.

Plans to build “a twin tower marvel” that will house the “world’s largest art gallery in the hotel use” in plant Land Plot 2-01-11 in the Colombo Port City, of 24,324 square meters, a gazette notice detailing tax breaks said.

“The entire structure is poised to enter the Guinness World Records as the biggest art piece in the world, transforming Colombo into a hub for artistic innovation,” the gazette said.

“An Exclusive 15-Meter Grand Clock designed to rival Big Ben, setting a Guinness World Record and will be the world’s largest Vertical Art Gallery with every floor function as an immersive art space, displaying works by renowned global artists…”

The company will get exemptions for import duty, value added tax and excise tax for project related investments.

Sri Lanka is planning to stop giving very long tax holidays as part of raising revenue, under an International Monetary Fund program.

Sri Lanka authorities have said businesses that were promised tax holidays earlier will be given in a type of ‘grandfathering’ process but new ones will be based on different criteria and the underlying Strategic Development Act and Port City laws will be amended

RELATED: Sri Lanka halts Port City, SDP tax breaks, laws to be changed in IMF benchmark

Sri Lanka’s corporate tax rates however are high at 30 percent, compared to about 20 percent for East Asian countries with monetary stability.

Tax holidays of 8 years are given in some East Asian countries and the corporate tax rate of Singapore which has exceptional monetary stability is only 17 percent. VAT rates are also about half of Sri Lanka’s rate.

Colombo Port City is a dollarized special economic zone which will be free of the central bank’s open market operations. (Colombo/July21/2025)