Empowering healthcare through education: People’s Bank and IIHS partner to support nursing excellence

PB Empowering Healthcare Through Education People’s Bank and IIHS Partner to Support Nursing Excellence

People’s Bank and the International Institute of Health Sciences (IIHS) have formalised a strategic partnership to enhance educational opportunities for nurses under the project “Heda Nena Weduma”. The Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) signing ceremony took place recently at the People’s Bank Head Office in Colombo 2, marking a significant milestone in fostering accessible education in the healthcare sector.

Recognising the global shortage of nurses, estimated at 13 million worldwide, People’s Bank and IIHS have joined forces to empower aspiring and practicing nurses through specialised educational loan facilities. Under this initiative, People’s Bank will offer special concessionary interest rates for nursing students enrolled in degree programs at IIHS, thereby easing the financial burden associated with higher education.

Founded over two decades ago, IIHS is a pioneer in international university learning centres, having facilitated the education of more than 3,000 local and regional students in the global health and education workforce. The institute’s commitment to excellence in healthcare education is further exemplified by its goal to train and develop 15,000 Government nurses through a Bachelor of Nursing program accredited by esteemed foreign universities based in the UK and Malaysia.

People’s Bank CEO/General Manager Clive Fonseka underscored the bank’s commitment to supporting the education sector and promoting healthcare excellence. “We are proud to partner with IIHS in this endeavour to provide affordable financing options that will enable more nurses to pursue higher education and fulfil their career aspirations,” said Fonseka.

IIHS Chairman/Vice Chancellor Dr. Nihal De Silva expressed enthusiasm about the collaboration, emphasising its potential to address the critical need for skilled nursing professionals worldwide. “Through ‘Heda Nena Weduma’, we aim to equip nurses with the necessary skills and qualifications to meet international healthcare standards and contribute effectively to healthcare delivery,” remarked Dr. De Silva.

The event was graced by the participation of the People’s Bank Chief Executive Officer/General Manager Clive Fonseka, Deputy General Manager (Retail Banking) T.M.W. Chandrakumara, and other corporate and executive management staff of People’s Bank, IIHS Chairman/Vice Chancellor Dr. Nihal De Silva, CEO/Director Academic Dr. Kithsiri Edirisinghe and other officials.