Seylan Bank partners Colombo Motor Show 2025 as Official Banking & Leasing Partner

Seylan Bank PLC has once again joined hands with the Colombo Motor Show as the Official Banking and Leasing Partner for the eighth consecutive year, continuing its long-standing association with the country’s largest international motor and motor accessories exhibition. The highly anticipated Colombo Motor Show 2025 will take place on November 21st, 22nd, and 23rd at the Bandaranaike Memorial International Conference Hall (BMICH).

Recognized as one of Sri Lanka’s most prominent automotive exhibitions, the event will feature over 200 trade stalls showcasing the latest in motor vehicles, accessories, spare parts, lubricants, tyres, batteries, and other supporting services. Organized by Asia Exhibition and Conventions (Pvt) Ltd for the 19th consecutive year, the exhibition continues to draw large crowds of vehicle enthusiasts and potential customers alike.

As the Official Banking and Leasing Partner, Seylan Bank will be present at the exhibition premises, offering visitors a comprehensive range of banking products and services. These will include attractive leasing facilities, inclusive of on-site lease evaluations, special rebates on processing fees and special interest rates. Further, Seylan Bank will offer credit card solutions, current and savings accounts, and a variety of digital banking services designed to make financial management more convenient for customers.

“Our partnership with the Colombo Motor Show represents more than just a sponsorship, it reflects Seylan Bank’s dedication to being part of Sri Lanka’s growing automotive ecosystem. For eight consecutive years, we’ve supported this platform that connects vehicle enthusiasts, businesses, and industry innovators. Through our specialized leasing and banking solutions, we continue to make vehicle ownership and financial accessibility easier for our customers,” said Asiri Abhayaratne, AGM, Marketing & Sales at Seylan Bank PLC.

Through this partnership, Seylan Bank aims to strengthen its commitment to the automotive sector while providing personalized financial solutions that meet the evolving needs of individuals and businesses. For more information, please contact Seylan Bank on 011-200 88 88.

ITC Ratnadipa presents ‘An Italian Affair’ in partnership with the Italian embassy

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.