President’s Pension

The NPP government’s efforts to abolish MPs’ pensions have met with stiff resistance. All members of the current Parliament, including 159 NPP legislators, will lose their retirement benefits unless the government walks back its plan. Several petitions have been filed before the Supreme Court against the bill seeking to abolish the MPs’ pension scheme. The matter is now best left to the judges of the apex court.

Interestingly, former Minister of Justice Dr. Wijeyadasa Rajapakshe has pointed out that President Anura Kumara Dissanayake, who is all out to do away with MPs’ pensions, will receive his retirement benefits.

What one gathers from Dr. Rajapakshe’s argument is that President Dissanayake, like his predecessors, will be entitled to his pension. Article 36 of the Constitution says: “Within one month of the commencement of the Constitution, Parliament shall by resolution determine the salary, allowances and pension entitlement of the holders of the office of President.  Such pension shall be in addition to any other pension to which such person is entitled by virtue of any prior service” (emphasis added). Article 36 (2) says, inter alia, “Any subsequent amendment, repeal or replacement of this Article and any subsequent law or any provision thereof inconsistent with this Article shall not have retrospective operation.” Article 36 (4) says: “Parliament may by resolution increase, but shall not reduce, the salary, allowances or pension entitlement of the holders of the office of President.”

One may recall that before the 2024 elections, the JVP/NPP leaders had the public believe that they would practise austerity a la Jose Mujica, who was the President of Uruguay from 2010 to 2015. Known as the world’s poorest President, Mujica, refused to move into the President’s House, and lived on a farm with his wife; his most notable asset was a 1987 Volkswagen Beetle. He donated his presidential salary and waited in queues with ordinary people in government hospitals, where he received treatment. He died a few months ago. It is unbecoming of the self-proclaimed Marxist leaders who denounced the previous Presidents for using insanely expensive vehicles purchased with state funds. In 2018, Dissanayake, as an Opposition MP, made a hue and cry about two bulletproof vehicles bought for the then Prime Minister Ranil Wickremesinghe’s use, at a staggering cost of Rs. 300 million each. He condemned that kind of expenditure as an utter waste of state funds. Now, the 600-million-rupee question is where those vehicles are. Are the incumbent government leaders using them?

Shouldn’t President Dissanayake emulate Mujica instead of his predecessors whom he berated for wasting tax money to maintain fleets of super luxury vehicles and large VVIP security divisions?

Meanwhile, it is puzzling why the JVP/NPP has not sought to abolish the MPs’ salaries as well. The JVP says it looks after its leaders and parliamentary group members. Besides, as evident from their asset declarations, they can easily do without their salaries. They should heed what Mujica famously said in an interview with BBC: “I’m called ‘the poorest president’, but I don’t feel poor. Poor people are those who only work to try to keep an expensive lifestyle, and always want more and more.” Sadly, as we argued in a previous comment, the only similarity one sees between the policies of the Mujica administration and those of the JVP-led NPP government is their lax attitude towards cannabis. Mujica legalised the recreational use of cannabis, and the JVP/NPP leaders have permitted the cultivation of cannabis for export.

While claiming that their well-wishers look after them, the JVP/NPP leaders insist that their political rivals in the current Parliament amassed huge amounts of ill-gotten wealth while they were in power. In fact, those who are currently in the Opposition enriched themselves while savouring power and now spend colossal amounts of funds on their election campaigns and live in clover. So, one can argue that the members on both sides of the House are in a position to serve the nation voluntarily.

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.