’Govt. has drawn up plans for debt repayments up to 2030’

Colombo, Aug. 20 (Daily Mirror) - The government yesterday rejected claims by former President Ranil Wickremesinghe that Sri Lanka could face an economic crisis in 2027/28, arguing that foreign reserves should be viewed only as an external buffer and not as the sole indicator of the country’s economic progress.

Deputy Minister of Finance and Planning Dr. Anil Jayantha Fernando told Parliament that maintaining an external buffer was not an economic target in itself, but rather an estimate that could fluctuate depending on prevailing economic conditions.

He said the government was working to strengthen the country’s external buffer while simultaneously stimulating economic activity and ensuring that the economy does not contract.

“Some are making allegations that the reserves are inadequate. Reserves are an external buffer and they fluctuate from time to time depending on the situation,” he said.

Dr. Fernando said that even the International Monetary Fund (IMF) had revised the foreign reserve targets set for Sri Lanka in 2023, taking into account changes in economic activity, including the decision to resume vehicle imports.

He noted that vehicle imports had not been factored into the estimates in 2022 and 2023. Since imports were permitted, Letters of Credit (LCs) amounting to around US$3.5 billion had been opened, he said.

“Had vehicle imports not been allowed, our reserves could have increased by US$3.5 billion. Sri Lanka has also repaid up to US$2.6 billion in foreign loans. Despite releasing reserves for imports, we have managed to maintain reserves at around US$6.6 billion,” he said.

Dr. Fernando said it was incorrect to claim that the country’s reserves were insufficient without providing a proper basis for such an assessment.

He said the government had drawn up plans for debt repayments up to 2030 and added that there would be no Domestic Dollar Bonds (DDBs) outstanding after 2028.

“After that, we will only have bilateral, multilateral and International Sovereign Bond (ISB) obligations. Sri Lanka will have to repay US$2.8 billion in foreign debt in 2028, US$3 billion in 2029 and US$3.2 billion in 2030,” he said.

Former President Wickremesinghe had earlier warned at a book launch that Sri Lanka would need to increase its foreign reserves to around US$15 billion and raise approximately US$3 billion through bond issuances to begin meeting its debt repayment obligations from 2028, describing it as a major challenge facing the country.

Huge challenge before SL to avoid another economic crisis: Ranil

No threat of another bankruptcy, Deputy Minister responds to Ranil

Sri Lanka’s 2028 debt repayments not cause for alarm: Economist