It’s happening now…what

Singer Alston Koch, who now resides in Australia, came up with a song, titled ‘Can We Take This Climate Change,’ and that was 16 years ago…in 2008.

Elaborating on what made him come up with this ‘climate change’ song, the ‘Disco Lady’ hitmaker said that he noticed that some of the beautiful fruit trees, butterflies, birds, etc., that existed when he was young, were gradually disappearing and that the heat was on the rise.

‘Can We Take This Climate Change’ was created by Alston for a United Nations WTO presentation in London, and that was in 2008.

The song was also presented by Geoffrey Lipman, Chairman of International Council of Tourism Partners (ICTP) at the ‘Live the Deal Climate Change’ conference in Copenhagen.

Alston Koch was the Goodwill Ambassador for the campaign, and the song was promoted, globally, by ICTP, in their campaign for green growth.

Barbara Follet, the then Minister of State for Great Britain, certified it as ‘A gift in song to the world suffering due to Climate Change.’

“Phew! The heat,” commented Alston, when he arrived in Sri Lanka for the 150th anniversary celebrations of his alma mater, Wesley College, which took place yesterday (March 11th) at Shangri-La, Colombo.

Recalling his days at Wesley College, Alston said that he was not involved in sports, or other activities, while at school, but excelled in his studies.

“I was always first in class and carried away all the major prizes, connected with studies.”

Alston also mentioned that since they were living at Cotta Road, Borella, he travelled by rickshaw, to school and back, from home.

But, surprisingly, Alston says he last did a concert, in Colombo, in 1980.

“After migrating to Australia, the opportunity never came my way to oblige music lovers, in my land of birth, for over four decades.

“Of course, I would love to do something special for my fans in Sri Lanka…performing with a live band and doing everything absolutely live, on stage”

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.