An internecine clash

The Opposition parties, except the SJB, have joined forces to launch a campaign to countervail what they describe as a government plan to establish a fascist state. The NPP government has dubbed the new Opposition alliance a coalition of political rejects and rogues, claiming that they have come together to protect their own interests rather than democracy. The Opposition alliance should secure the backing of the SJB before venturing to mobilise the masses.

The Opposition’s argument that the JVP-led NPP is pushing the country towards a one-party rule is not untenable. However, the incumbent government is not alone in having sought to do so. The UNP strove to decimate the Opposition after its mammoth victory in the 1977 general election. Thankfully, it failed in that endeavour and the Opposition made a comeback 17 years later. The Mahinda Rajapaksa government also debilitated the Opposition by engineering a host of defections and resorting to coercion, but could not stop the worm from turning, so to speak.

If the Opposition is to turn the tables on the NPP government, it will have to eliminate the factors that led to its crushing defeat in last year’s general election. There are many individuals accused of corruption in the new Opposition alliance. Their mere presence at the anti-government rallies to be held is bound to put off millions of voters. These corrupt elements cannot dupe the public into believing that they are genuinely desirous of protecting democracy and helping the public; that they are driven by self-interest is obvious. The government cannot cover up its failure to deliver the promised change, however hard it may bash the Opposition. It has to fulfil its election pledges, most of which remain unfulfilled.

Meanwhile, the government and the Opposition ought to take cognisance of a great peril to democracy. Those who are currently in the political wilderness once tested the people’s patience by indulging in corruption and abuse of power and mismanaging the economy, which eventually went into a tailspin. Disillusioned electors voted out of frustration, propelling a radical outfit to power. The self-proclaimed messiahs, too, have failed to be above suspicion; they stand accused of various corrupt deals.

The people’s frustration with the incumbent dispensation has given a big fillip to anti-politics, an insidious phenomenon that chips away at the foundations of democracy. Trust and legitimacy are the first casualties of anti-politics, which causes the public to lose faith in all three branches of government—the Executive, the Legislature and the Judiciary—making it difficult for them to maintain their mandate. Citizens withdraw from participation in democratic processes, and their disengagement, which is usually reflected in voter apathy, weakens democratic responsiveness and accountability. When formal channels of democracy lose legitimacy, populism and authoritarianism present themselves as viable options, paving the way for the rise of radical and populist groups to power. Polarisation and conflict become the defining characteristics of a polity riven by anti-politics, with the politicians in power vilifying their opponents at the expense of social cohesion.

Having ridden to power on the crest of a wave of public anger, the NPP government is apparently not keen to stem the tide of anti-politics. What it should realise is that it cannot retain its hold on power indefinitely, and the day may not be far off when the swing voters who made its swift ascent to power possible switch their allegiance to some other party. There is the possibility of public resentment finding expression in another mass uprising unless the warring politicians counter the rise of anti-politics by restoring public trust in democratic governance through openness, responsiveness and inclusiveness of politics.

For corrosive anti-political sentiments to be reversed, the government and the Opposition must work together to rebuild public trust in the democratic process. Otherwise, both sides will be the losers, as in Madagascar, where fragile civilian rule recently collapsed amidst a mass uprising.

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.