Ceylon Chamber urges further Sri Lanka talks with US to reduce tariff

ECONOMYNEXT – Sri Lanka’s Ceylon Chamber of Commerce urged the government to further discuss to reduce tariffs imposed on American citizens by their President, so as the close the gap with competitors.

The new Trump tariff for India (originally set at 29 percent), a potential competitor is not yet known.

The request to reduce tariffs on goods sold by Sri Lanka to US citizens comes as some businesses in Sri Lanka lobby the government to charge very high tariffs.

Last week, the former head of an organization called Sri Lanka Apparel Brands Association threatened to further instigate the government to raise para-tariffs on apparel sold by online platforms at a press conference organized Sri Lanka Shippers Council at the chamber premises, and praised customs for charging taxes by HS code.

Sri Lanka’s top exporters are represented at the Sri Lanka Shippers Council.

In the US items up to 800 dollars purchased from online platforms are allowed in free under a so-called ‘de minimis’ rule.

When businesses in Sri Lanka lobby for higher import taxes, government officials are put in an impossible position and cannot offer lower tariffs to the US in exchange, and also fans the flames of protectionist ideology, critics say.

Tariff Reduction to the U.S. a Significant Step – Ceylon Chamber

The Ceylon Chamber of Commerce views the reduction in the tariff rate from 44% to 30% a constructive and important first step by the Government toward bringing Sri Lanka’s tariff structure for exports to the U.S. closer to that of regional competitors.

We encourage continued engagement with the U.S. administration to secure a further reduction by 1 August, especially given that several regional peers are expected to benefit from even lower rates.

Progress in achieving a further reduction will be critical to strengthening Sri Lanka’s position in this key market, maintaining buyer confidence, and supporting sustained trade growth over the long term.

The Ceylon Chamber stands ready to support the Government’s efforts in this regard through constructive dialogue, industry feedback, and coordinated advocacy