SLT-Mobitel wins ‘Best Corporate Citizen Sustainability Award 2023’

Recognised for its exceptional commitment to sustainable business practices, Sri Lanka Telecom PLC (SLT) secured the esteemed ‘Best Corporate Citizen Sustainability Award 2023’ in the ‘Other’ category at a recent gala event.

The award was granted following a rigorous evaluation process, during which SLT competed against 33 leading corporations.

The annual awards are organised by the Ceylon Chamber of Commerce, Sri Lanka’s premier business chamber, to felicitate organisations committed to sustainability across various sectors.

SLT-Mobitel said sustainability has always been a core pillar of its corporate strategy. The recognition reaffirms SLT-Mobitel’s position as a champion of sustainable development in Sri Lanka amidst continuous efforts to minimise its environmental footprint. The award also highlights SLT-Mobitel’s strength in uplifting communities, ensuring ethical governance, and driving economic progress through innovative products and services while creating long-term value for all stakeholders through responsible business conduct.

The ‘Best Corporate Citizen Sustainability Award’ celebrates organisations that have implemented comprehensive sustainability initiatives spanning Environmental, Social and Governance (ESG) aspects.

The Chamber evaluated companies across stringent criteria, including environmental stewardship, customer and community relations, corporate governance, financial performance, economic contributions, and special sustainable development projects.

Shortlisted companies then underwent rigorous interviews with an elite panel of international and United Nations representatives. SLT-Mobitel’s senior leadership team, including Chief Executive Officer Janaka Abeysinghe, Chief Marketing Officer Prabhath Dahanayake, Chief People Officer Dr. Chandana Wijayanama, GM – Marketing Services Anuruddha Suriyarachchi, and several other senior officials attended the glittering awards ceremony.

As Sri Lanka’s leading digital services provider, SLT-Mobitel said it will continue to raise the bar for corporate sustainability, paving the way for a more prosperous and environmentally conscious future for the nation.