Contributions of Chanaka Amaratunga towards Constitutional Reform

The people of Sri Lanka owe a significant debt of gratitude to Chanaka Amaratunga for his efforts to gather a group of scholars, politicians and concerned citizens to formulate ways in which the Constitution of the country could be amended to protect democratic freedoms . The series of seminars which he, and a group of members of the Council for Liberal Democracy, organized between November 1987 and June 1989 as recorded in the book on Ideas for Constitutional Reform which emerged from the seminars, remains a vital resource and a continuing stimulus for further thought and consideration on building new structures which could better protect individual liberties.

I will begin by recalling the fundamental objectives which Chanaka Amaratunga espoused in leading this venture almost forty years ago. As he clearly stated in the introduction to the book, the seminars were organized with the objective that out of ‘. . . . the free exchange of ideas, to articulate the principles and discover the specific proposals which must be the basis of a reform of the current Sri Lankan Constitution. He and his compatriots in the Council for Liberal Democracy were also clear on the objective of constitutional reform: ‘. . . we should begin the process of examining the Constitution of this country in its widest sense, from a standpoint of safeguarding the rights of the individual.’

Chanaka Amaratunga also pointed out that ‘ We have looked at constitutions as documents that enable politicians to exercise power. . . . we should focus our minds on how to control them, tie in and circumscribe politicians as much as possible. That is one of the reasons why he argued that ‘. . . we should consider ways in which we can create constitutional processes to see that political power is divided among as many people as possible.’ This might be why he was an advocate of a federal constitution. In his view, ‘A second adverse feature of our Constitutional processes has been a belief that power should be concentrated.’

On the other hand, he also cautioned us against ethnic and religious divisions. As he pointed out, ‘Racial mistrust, racial hatred, and a vision of a future based on racial lines has been evoked among the Sinhalese and the Tamils, and now even among the Muslims.’

He clearly saw a need for a practical outcome in his inaugural speech on 28 November 1987. In his own words. . . ‘. . . the crisis that rages in Sri Lanka at the present time could never have reached the gigantic proportions of today but for the regressive nature of the Constitution of 1972 and the far more authoritarian and illiberal nature of the Constitution of 1978. . . . so, we must recognize that if individual and political freedom, racial harmony, justice and peace are our objectives, they are unattainable without the enactment of a Constitution that is compatible with the attainment of such objectives.’

Back in the 1980s, some of us who had written commentaries on the exercise of political power in Sri Lanka tended to agree with Chanaka’s basic political approach and the need for more safeguards of individual freedoms. The Constitution of 1972 had basically ended the judicial review of legislation which had existed under the 1948 constitution. The public service was brought under closer political control after the abolition of the Public Service Commission. The extension of the legislature’s term of office through the device of drawing up a new Constitution also damaged faith in the democratic process. Some of us working in academic institutions had been disillusioned by the United Front government’s actions in the 1970s in expanding political control over universities by replacing largely independent universities with a centrally controlled single university. This institution operated under the transitory provisions of the 1972 law and from 1972-1979 all university bodies were considered advisory in nature, without executive powers which were all vested at the center. Then again, the change of rules for undergraduate admission to universities, adversely affecting students who were educated in the Tamil medium, clearly alienated minority groups from the state.

The change of government resulting from the victory of the United National Party in the election of 1977 provided continuing evidence that Chanaka Amaratunga’s statement that an ‘ . . .adverse feature of our Constitutional processes has been a belief that power should be concentrated …’ was fully justified. It is well known that the Constitution of 1978 set up a President who was not answerable to the legislature. The denial of civic rights to opposition politicians including former Prime Minister Sirima Bandaranaike, while it gained temporary political advantage, eventually weakened trust in government.

The extension of the life of the legislature elected in 1977 for five years, all the way up to 1989 through a referendum, was also clearly the use of the political process for partisan advantage. While the single university was replaced by separate universities with some degree of autonomy, those of us who were in the academic world wore disheartened when an amendment to the Universities Act in 1985 abolished the University Courts and returned the control of the appointment of Vice Chancellors to the President of the country. There were a number of important specific recommendations that emanated out of the presentations and discussions of the seven seminars that Chanaka Amaratunga organized.

One was that while a system of proportional representation (PR) should be used to elect legislators, it would be better to adopt a mixed system as that which exists in the Federal Republic of Germany with a combination of PR and direct election through constituencies. There was agreement that in the conversion of votes to seats, the threshold of 12.5% was too high and should be reduced.1 It was also recommended that the powers of Parliament (which should include an Upper House) should be strengthened, allowing effective Parliamentary scrutiny of Ministers and ensuring their accountability to the legislature.

Members of the legislature who resigned or were expelled from the party through which he or she was elected were to be protected from expulsion from the legislature. It was also agreed that legislation should be subjected to judicial review and should not have provisions which violated basic human rights, that a comprehensive bill of rights should be included in the Constitution and that the independence of judges should be strengthened. The Executive Presidency was to be replaced by a Cabinet of Ministers headed by a Prime Minister.

It was also agreed that devolution of power was to be safeguarded by protecting the powers and functioning of Provincial Councils. There was a useful discussion on ‘group rights’ and the consensus was that while the rights of groups should be protected in the Bill of Rights, ‘where there is any conflict between group or community rights and the rights of individuals, the rights of individuals shall prevail.’

A number of the recommendations emanated from the seminars and they were explicitly recorded in the volume that Chanaka Amaratunga edited. These ideas have been often discussed in the four decades of political debate that followed the publication of the volume. One key idea that stirred much interest was the drafting of an entirely new constitution to replace that of 1978. President Chandrika Kumaratunga presented a complete new draft Constitution in 2000 but she was unable to have it enacted as she did not have a super-majority in Parliament and the opposition parties did not agree to support many of the proposals.

Later, in 2016, a parliamentary steering committee, chaired by Ranil Wickremesinghe who was the prime minister at the time, received recommendations from six parliamentary committees with proposals for a transition from the executive presidency to a parliamentary model, changes in the electoral system, and the strengthening of judicial independence (including more leeway for judicial review of legislation), as well as further devolution of power and protection of human rights. However, no effective action was taken before that government led by President Sirisena ended. The current ruling political alliance, known as the National People’s Power,pledged before its victory in parliamentary elections in November 2024 that it would enact a new constitution abolishing the executive presidency, reforming the electoral system, and ensuring meaningful devolution. No concrete steps have as yet been taken to implement this promise but there have been continuing efforts to continue discussions on the issue.

Apart from the wholesale efforts to change the entire constitutional structure, there have been piecemeal efforts at restricting executive power continued, including efforts by organizations such as Transperancy International of Sri Lanka. The changes have not all gone one way. The 17th and 19th amendments reduced the powers of the president and the 18th and 20th amendments did the opposite. The discussions have included input from outside Sri Lanka as illustrated by critical comments of the International Commission of Jurists on the expansion of the President’s power over the judiciary with the 20th Amendment of 2020. In view of the swift changes in the technology of disseminating information, one of the key issues that might require attention in the coming years is how access to information might be safeguarded as a social right.

One of the recommendations of the seminar series that saw swift implementation was the reduction of the threshold limit of 12.5% of votes for consideration of the award of seats to any list in the election to the legislature. This was proposed by both Victor Gunawardana and me in our presentations and generally won support among seminar participants. Despite some criticism that such a reduction would encourage the multiplication of contesting lists and fissiparous tendencies, the threshold was reduced from 12.5% to 5% through the 15th Amendment to the Constitution certified on December 17, 1988.

In conclusion, let me emphasize that while the need to devise a legal framework that would protect as Chanaka Amaratunga said – ‘individual and political freedom, racial harmony, justice and peace’ – in Sri Lanka, is yet to be realized, we need to recognize that his contributions to organizing debate on this subject were unparalleled, and we could do no better to honour his memory than by following his injunction to have inclusive and open discussions on how we can best reach this valued common objective. Those who worked with him will remember that his analytical acuity was enhanced by an exceptional readiness to listen to others, even those who strongly disagreed with him, his personal charm and graciousness and his readiness to give others credit for their roles in a common enterprise. For me, working with him was a joy and an honour and I will always have positive memories of the years we collaborated in a common enterprise.

OPA Facilitates Brainstorming Session on Harnessing Digital Transformation for Inclusive Development

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.