Sri Lanka appoints ministerial committees to assess middle east developments

ECONOMYNEXT – Sri Lanka has appointed three ministerial committees to address potential global and Iranian impacts on the island nation amid fears of an escalating middle east war after the assassination of a Hamas political leader in Iran.

President Ranil Wickremesinghe arranged to appoint the committees “as a preliminary measure to address the security and economic pressures that may affect Sri Lanka, considering the potential developments in the Middle East and globally,” his media division said.

“If a war breaks out, what will happen to fuel prices? If any issues arise, we might need to bring back everyone in the Middle East to Sri Lanka, similar to what we faced when Kuwait was invaded in 1991. This would result in a loss of revenue for the country, making it difficult for the emerging Sri Lanka to handle such a situation,” Wickremesinghe told a gathering of provincial councilors on Wednesday (31).

“I instructed the foreign minister to engage with their counterparts from other countries to discuss a joint program to manage this situation. Our focus should be on these activities. Our speaker is currently in Tehran, and we are working to bring him back as soon as possible.”

The president said the government is taking proactive measures to address any situation that may arise. “There is no benefit in merely shouting from the stage; we must protect the economy and move forward. International agreements cannot be abandoned; they must be upheld and advanced.”

The committees will be established to look into national security, and to assess economic impacts; the third which will include the president and prime minister will oversee the proposals of the former.

These two committees “are tasked with determining the preliminary measures to be taken and reporting their findings to the high-level committee. This is to address any direct or indirect impact on Sri Lanka’s national security and economy due to emerging situations in the Middle East, including Iran, and globally.”

The President has also tasked the two relevant committees with ensuring the uninterrupted supply of fuel and other essential commodities, minimising any impact on the public, the PMD said.

These committees are required to submit their reports to the high-level committee, which will then make prompt decisions based on the findings. (Colombo/Jul31/2024)