Cargills Bank empowers Teenagers with the “Smart Teens” Savings Account

Cargills Bank recently unveiled its “Smart Teens” Savings Account, designed exclusively for teenagers between 13 and 17 years of age. This innovative account aims to promote financial literacy, savings habits and financial responsibility among teenagers, offering them a structured environment in which they can cultivate responsible cash management habits. “Smart Teens” also gives teenagers an opportunity to start their financial journeys early, while making them equipped with the tools needed for a secure financial future. Featuring special, attractive interest rates and exclusive benefits, “Smart Teens” serves as a stepping stone for teenagers, encouraging them to take ownership of their finances.

The account will provide freedom for teenagers, but with necessary parental oversight, as parents play a key role in guiding their teens through the process of learning good financial habits. Accordingly, while teens have access to their own accounts through free internet banking, mobile banking facilities with restricted transaction values, and a smart debit card. Parents will receive SMS alerts and e-statements so they can monitor transactions. The balance between independence and necessary supervision enables teens to make informed financial decisions, while remaining safe. This will allow them to learn the importance of saving and good financial judgement with a degree of personal responsibility, but while supported by their parents.

Discussing the importance of this new product and proposition, Assistant General Manager (Retail & SME Business), Lasantha Mahendrarajah said, “At Cargills Bank, we believe that financial education should begin at an early age. The ‘Smart Teens’ savings account is our way of empowering the younger generation with the knowledge and tools necessary to take control of their financial futures.

HNB Assurance Celebrates Customer Service Week with a Commitment to Go Above and Beyond

Dilmah Conservation Brings Together Seven Experts to Share Knowledge at “Elephant Knowledge Walk” Centre, Udawalawe

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.