CH17 Loyalty expands services into Maldives retail market

CH17 Loyalty CEO Jumar Preena (centre)  with Development Interplan Ceylon CEO Zuraish  Hashim (right) and  CH17 Director Rizvi Farouq

Offers benefits and privileges to cardholders in both SL and Maldives

CH17 Loyalty, a leader in customer loyalty solutions, corporate membership management, and staff benefit schemes, announces its expansion into the Maldives retail market.

This strategic milestone marks CH17’s first foray into an international market, reinforcing its position as a pioneer in customer management technology.

As part of this venture, CH17 has partnered with Development International Ceylon Ltd. (DICL), a Colombo based exports company to the Maldives, to deliver a bespoke loyalty management solution focusing on both Business-to-Business (B2B) and Business-to-Consumer (B2C) requirements. DICL, a well-established Sri Lankan company, has deep connections in the Maldives, excelling in multiple business verticals, including being an authorised reseller for Samsung appliances and a trusted supplier of Sri Lankan spices, fruits, and vegetables to the Maldives for over three decades.

“This collaboration highlights the increasing demand for advanced loyalty solutions in the Maldives while introducing cross-border benefits for CH17 members,” said CH17 Loyalty Founder and CEO Jumar Preena. “Maldivian CH17 members will enjoy rewards and discounts in Sri Lanka, and vice versa, making our program uniquely appealing and fostering stronger ties between the two nations.”

To manage its overseas operations, CH17 has formed a dedicated entity, Channel17 International Ltd, with an independent board of directors and shareholders.

Development International Ceylon Ltd. CEO Zuraish Hashim said: “We found the right solution in CH17’s single platform. Their technology and experience in customer engagement will bring immense value to the Maldives retail market. Maldivian customers can look forward to innovative loyalty programs that will drive business growth and improve customer experiences.”

CH17’s technology offers a robust suite of features designed to enhance customer experiences, optimise operations, and provide businesses with valuable insights into customer behaviour. The cross-border reward program further distinguishes CH17’s loyalty offering, providing Sri Lankan and Maldivian members with exceptional benefits in both countries.

This expansion into the Maldives reflects CH17’s commitment to growth in dynamic markets and its dedication to supporting businesses with innovative solutions that meet local needs. Established in 2013, CH17 is a trailblazer in customer loyalty, rewards, and engagement solutions, serving industries including finance, leasing, insurance, and apparel. Managing nearly one million customers and over 50 consumer brands in Sri Lanka, CH17 is known for its cutting-edge SaaS-based platforms. In 2024, CH17 launched Channel17 International Ltd., to oversee its overseas ventures, beginning with the Maldives retail market.