Ceylon Chamber hosts high-level Vietnamese delegation to explore opportunities in agriculture

The Ceylon Chamber of Commerce recently hosted a high-level delegation from the Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development of Vietnam, engaged in a working visit to strengthen bilateral relations between Vietnam and Sri Lanka, in the fields of agricultural, forestry and fishery.

Organised in association with the Sri Lanka – Greater Mekong Business Council and the Embassy of Vietnam in Sri Lanka, the delegation led by Vietnam’s Agriculture and Rural Development Minister Le Minh Hoan, comprised high-ranking officials of the Ministry and prominent entrepreneurs of Vietnam’s agriculture sector. A roundtable discussion explored opportunities for collaboration in agriculture, forestry, and fisheries and facilitated exchanges of trade and industry models, establishing connections with business and industry associations in Sri Lanka.

Ceylon Chamber Chairman Duminda Hulangamuwa, welcomed the delegation’s opportune timing, stating that following on from the gateway of opportunities presented by the recently inked Sri Lanka - Thailand Free Trade Agreement Sri Lanka will continue to explore prospects for increased collaboration in the region. “Sri Lanka is strong in several agricultural sectors, with tea, fruit and vegetables especially, having strong export potential to Vietnam. Similarly, Vietnam’s progressive technology can strengthen the agriculture sector in Sri Lanka,” he added.

Highlighting Vietnam’s competitive advantage in agricultural, forestry, and aquatic products and the country’s global ranking in agricultural exports, Vietnam Minister Le Minh Hoan stated that bilateral agricultural trade between Vietnam and Sri Lanka has potential for growth.

Further, he highlighted the respective strengths of the two countries to complement mutual progress and development.

Ambassador of Vietnam to Sri Lanka Ho Thi Thanh Truc added that given the similarities in topography and climate between the two countries, partnerships to develop the agriculture sector were particularly relevant, and invited the delegates from both countries to make use of the opportunity to forge connections.

Sri Lanka – Greater Mekong Business Council President S. M. D. Suriyakumara assured the delegation of the Council’s cooperation in facilitating trade and investment cooperation in the agricultural sectors of the Sri Lanka and Vietnam.

The event was followed by B2B sessions providing a platform for representatives of companies from Sri Lanka to interact with their Vietnamese counterparts, fostering international cooperation and potential partnerships.