Fitch rates Sri Lanka’s governance bonds, but not macro-linked bonds

ECONOMYNEXT – Fitch has rated Sri Lanka’s Governance Linked bonds CCC+ in line with the sovereign rating but said it was not rating the bonds which are tied to changes in gross domestic product, where the principal payout also changes.

A 2035, bond which the government can pay in rupees, was given a CCC+ local currency rating.

“Fitch does not rate the macro-linked bonds, which would not be in line with its sovereign rating criteria,” the rating agency said.

The new bonds were issued to restructure defaulted sovereign bonds.

Fitch upgraded Sri Lanka from restricted default to CCC+ after the completion of a debt restructuring.

Fitch Ratings – Hong Kong – 30 Dec 2024: Fitch Ratings has assigned a ‘CCC+’ foreign-currency rating to Sri Lanka’s governance-linked bonds maturing in 2035 and a ‘CCC+’ local-currency rating to the US dollar step-up bonds maturing in 2038, which the government can decide to repay in rupees. Fitch does not rate the macro-linked bonds, which would not be in line with its sovereign rating criteria.

The ratings are in line with Sri Lanka’s Long-Term Foreign- and Local-Currency Issuer Default Ratings (IDRs).

On 20 December 2024, Fitch upgraded Sri Lanka’s Long-Term Foreign-Currency IDR to ‘CCC+’, from ‘RD’ (Restricted Default). Fitch typically does not assign an Outlook to sovereigns with a rating of ‘CCC+’ or below. Fitch also upgraded the Long-Term Local-Currency IDR to ‘CCC+’, from ‘CCC-‘, to align with the Long-Term Foreign-Currency IDR.

The following ESG issues represent Key Rating Drivers for the bonds; other Key Rating Drivers can be found in the issuer rating action commentary dated 20 December 2024.

ESG – Governance: Sri Lanka has an ESG Relevance Score of ‘5’ for Political Stability and Rights as well as for the Rule of Law, Institutional and Regulatory Quality and Control of Corruption. These scores reflect the high weight that the World Bank Governance Indicators (WBGI) have in Fitch’s proprietary Sovereign Rating Model (SRM). Sri Lanka has a medium WBGI ranking in the 38th percentile, reflecting a recent record of peaceful political transitions, a moderate level of rights for participation in the political process, moderate institutional capacity, established rule of law and a moderate level of corruption.

The ratings on the bonds are sensitive to any changes in the Long-Term Foreign-Currency IDR, which has the following rating sensitivities (as per aforementioned rating action commentary).

Factors that Could, Individually or Collectively, Lead to Negative Rating Action/Downgrade

– Public Finances: An increase in government debt/GDP, potentially reflecting an inability to further raise revenue, resulting in wider budget deficits.

– External Finances: Inability to rebuild foreign-exchange reserves that weakens debt repayment capacity. Factors that Could, Individually or Collectively, Lead to Positive Rating Action/Upgrade

– Public Finances: A sustained decline in the general government debt/GDP ratio that is underpinned by strong implementation of a credible medium-term fiscal consolidation strategy, increase in fiscal revenue and faster economic growth.

REFERENCES FOR SUBSTANTIALLY MATERIAL SOURCE CITED AS KEY DRIVER OF RATING

The principal sources of information used in the analysis are described in the Applicable Criteria.