Ceylon Green Life Plantation ties up with NIPM for major developments

Sri Lanka’s prominent guava and agro cultivators Ceylon Green Life Plantation Ltd. exchanged letters of understanding with National Institute of Plantation Management for 6 key projects – development of worlds 1st guava tea, creating strategic agroprenuers to Sri Lanka and to the world, and creating Sri Lanka’s 1st agro marketing lab driven with innovations from guava plantation are few major highlights.

Speaking to media, Founder/Entrepreneur Dr. Marlon Petersay said, “This total tie up was initiated under the leadership of our CEO Hashan Haputhanthri, who spearheaded this strategic relationship and I am grateful for him for this historic move. We as an organisation who cultivates lands with guava widely on three strategic, well thought out plans and extremely delighted to partner for this National project. Through this, Sri Lanka will have agroprenuers and scientific modelling with AI technology will be introduce as well.”

Speaking to media, CEO Hashan Haputhanthri said, “We thank NIPM in agreeing to this historic tie-up. They came forward whole heartedly, CEO/Director Dr.Prasad  Dharmasena’s inspiration and openness as a true professional intellect is commendable. Also, I must thank NIPM Academic Affairs Head Nishamini Illanganthilaka and Training Specialist (Management) Ruvini N. Lokuhetti and the staff for being with me to get this national project through. Without, them this project was not possible. We are happy to announce that we will embark on the experiment for guava tea project within the coming weeks with NIPM”.

Ceylon Green Life Plantation founded by veteran entrepreneur Dr. Marlon Francis Petersay established his vision in 2022 to bring pride to Sri Lanka through empowering “farming” in the most innovative fashion. Spanning across the island, he ventured to consumers to invest on lands that cultivates fruits to serve the purpose that he planned out.

Ceylon Green Life Plantation FMCG Sector further ventured into making the best of the innovations from the harvest that he acquired. Deelectaa guava tea will be the innovation that all Sri Lankan are waiting for and with its health benefits, it is indeed a sure success that will revolutionise the Sri Lankan tea market. In the near future, Deelectaa will enter into almost all sectors of the FMCG category. Ceylon Green Life Plantation’s vision is to offer the Sri Lankan farmer a better life by culminating values such as integrity and empathy while increasing the income of the people by providing productivity through foreign exports.