Police warn Sri Lanka property owners of renting after financial scams

ECONOMYNEXT – Police in Sri Lanka have warned local property owners to do better due diligence before renting their properties after raiding two locations in the island nation’s Western province running financial scams by foreigners including people from China, India, and Thailand.

Police raided two locations where the foreigners have carried out financial scams using online.

They have arrested eight Chinese, four Indians including three females, and five Thai including three females in the first raid on Sunday in the country’s Western town of Hanwella along with 96 mobile and 16 desktop computers, Police Spokesman Nihal Thalduwa said.

In the second raid, also on Sunday, the police have arrested 21 Chinese, one Indian woman, and one Thai woman along with 403 mobile phones, 24 laptops, and 13 desktops.

Thalduwa said the culprits have been staying for a long time in the locations and they have recruited cooks to prepare foods with proper room and internet facilities along with swimming pools.

“When foreigners or Sri Lankans take your properties on rent and if they pay a higher rate and for a long period, whether it is a hotel or villa, please be cautious about what they are doing,” Thalduwa told reporters on Monday (07).

“Aiding and abetting for financial crimes is a serious offence. When they are coming, they might come with different names.”

“You have to include some clauses in your agreement with them. We urge you (property owners) to give special consideration to these. Also please check on them from time to time on what they are doing.”

“They transfer the money to foreign country using crypto currency as soon as they get the online payment.”

He said the scammers use investment and sex traps to get the money from people.

Sri Lanka has seen an increasing number of financial crimes raided in the recent past. In the last four months, the police have arrested more than 80 foreigners who were allegedly operating online scamming compounds in the southern part of the island using hotels including in some tourist hotspot, according to local media reports.

Financial literacy among many Sri Lankans is low and they quickly fall into higher return investment traps via online financial scams, experts say. (Colombo/October 07/2024)