LANKATILES sees high prospects both locally and overseas for new product

County’s leading wall and floor tile manufacturer and exporter, LANKATILES said it sees a vast market potential for solar reflective rooftop tiles both locally and particularly in countries with tropical climates.

Introducing Sri Lanka’s first solar reflective cool rooftop tile, a long awaited local solution to the growing challenge of heat transfer from exposed rooftops, terraces and balconies into indoor living spaces, the company said there is already a huge market opportunity in the country with closer to one million houses having rooftops concreted or with roof terraces.

LANKATILES Managing Director Priyantha Talwatte speaking to Mirror Business said their plan is to capitalise on the local opportunity first and then focus on export markets. “Architects, engineers, developers and construction professionals in the country are now keener on working better with outdoor open spaces for residential and commercial projects, which can facilitate an alfresco living, along with various other activities. We have already received some orders for this product from commercial users for outdoor solutions, including business premises and also religious places where people walk barefoot during daytime”.

Commenting on Sri Lanka’s construction sector, Talwatte noted that the industry is in the growth path though there was a dip in the Purchasing Managers Index for April. “There are many large-scale construction activities, new projects underway particularly in urban areas in spite of the ongoing geopolitical turmoil. Many outside players too are entering the industry. We see a push up in demand specifically for innovative building material suited for Sri Lankan conditions, and our solar reflective rooftop tile is poised to make a significant impact.”

Meanwhile, LANKATILES Director Naimish Patibandha, with over 24 years of extensive experience in India’s building materials industry, will oversee the company’s sales and marketing operations across domestic and international markets.

He said the company will target countries like Maldives and the Middle East initially where the demand is high for cool rooftop tiles, and added it has already started sending samples.

“We will be going for a massive overseas promotional campaign shortly. Our manufacturing plants in Sri Lanka have the capacity to cater to both Sri Lankan and export markets simultaneously. The company’s reputation as a world-class tile manufacturer and its current footprint in global markets will be a major strength going forward.”

“Furthermore, there is a global trend on energy efficiency and environmentally responsible construction, and that too will have a say when promoting the product overseas since ours is a green building product,” Patibandha noted.

Highlighting the extensive research and technical expertise behind the innovation, the Managing Director said developing Sri Lanka’s first cool rooftop tile required extensive research, product engineering and performance validation, and it took almost three years from initial concept stage to final product.

According to the company, the product’s performance has been independently verified through testing conducted by the CEPT Advisory Foundation (CAF), India, achieving an outstanding Solar Reflectance Index (SRI) value above 96. SRI is a globally recognised measure used to assess how effectively a surface reflects solar radiation and dissipates heat. A higher SRI value indicates a cooler surface under direct sunlight, highlighting the tile’s exceptional solar reflective capabilities. This latest innovation reflects LANKATILES’ commitment to developing products that not only enhance living spaces but also improve the everyday quality of life for people.