University of Moratuwa and Union Bank link-up to help ‘transform Sri Lanka’s future education’

Senior Professor N.D. Gunawardena, Vice-Chancellor of the University of Moratuwa, highlighted the university’s journey in ‘transforming the future of education in Sri Lanka’, as a crucial role.

Speaking at an event held at The Taj Samudra, last week in association with the Union Bank, the Vice-Chancellor connected the Bank’s motto, “Transform Real Lives,” with the university’s mission to revolutionize education and make an impact on students.

The Bank announced a new Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) with the University of Moratuwa and the National Innovation Agency to support the National Entrepreneurship Development Programme (NEDP). This initiative aims to empower SMEs and youth aspiring to become entrepreneurs across Sri Lanka.

‘From the beginning, we have been transforming lives, the Vice-Chancellor remarked, noting that the University attracts top students from across the nation, securing the “best of the best” for its programs.

‘The University of Moratuwa, renowned for its emphasis on technological education, continues to see overwhelming demand, particularly within its Engineering Faculty, which now enrolls 90% of the top 10% of students in the country, the Vice Chancellor explained.

The Moratuwa University VC added: ‘The University’s commitment to innovation is also reflected in its unique academic offerings. The university boasts Sri Lanka’s only dedicated faculty for Information Technology and is the sole state university with a specialized architecture faculty. The popularity of its Artificial Intelligence program further underscores its leadership in cutting-edge fields.

‘The University’s achievements in Business Education is also notable. As the first Dean of the Business Faculty, I encountered challenges in launching the program in 2017, when the intake was a modest 100 students. Today, the Faculty has expanded to include streams in Financial Services, Business Course Management, and Business Analytics, positioning the University as a formidable competitor even against established institutions like the University of Sri Jayawardenepura.

“Our approach has been one of differentiation. The University has tailored its Medical Faculty to stand out by integrating medical technology, a unique feature among Sri Lankan institutions.

‘We take pride in the ongoing efforts to change the lives of students and the University is continuously commitment to being in the forefront of education in Sri Lanka.

‘We have established a private company within the university, linked to the National Entrepreneurship Development Programme, as a key initiative in fostering innovation and entrepreneurship among students.’

The mentioned MOU was signed in the presence of Nirvana Chaudhary, chairman of Union Bank, Dilshan Rodrigo, Director/CEO of the Union Bank and Senior Professor N.D. Gunawardena.

The NEDP certificate course aims to equip participants with the skills and knowledge needed to launch and grow their social enterprises. The program will be open to Sri Lankan citizens aged 18 and above who are passionate about driving social change and demonstrate a commitment to advancing their social enterprise ideas.

The University of Moratuwa, with its tested and approved short course offerings, will co-brand the program with the Union Bank and the National Innovation Agency, ensuring a robust and impactful initiative. This partnership underscores Union Bank’s commitment to fostering entrepreneurship and innovation in Sri Lanka.

Sri Lanka achieves $9 billion in export income Income in First Half of 2024 – State Minister for Investment Promotion, Dilum Amunugama

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.