Nestlé Lanka honoured at Best Corporate Citizen Sustainability Awards 2024

Nestlé Lanka was honoured with numerous accolades at the Best Corporate Citizen Sustainability Awards 2024, walking away with seven awards in several categories including, First Runners Up – Best Corporate Citizen Sustainability Award 2024, Top Ten Best Corporate Citizens, Triple Bottom Line Award – Environmental Sustainability (Planet), Sector Award – Manufacturing, Category Award – Supplier Relations, and two awards in Consistent Commitment and Continuous Improvement for Environmental Integration and Employee Relations. Widely considered Sri Lanka’s highest corporate honour, the Best Corporate Citizen Sustainability Awards, organized by the Ceylon Chamber of Commerce, recognizes sustainability champions who operate with a strong focus on people, planet, and profit.

“We are humbled to be consistently recognized at the Best Corporate Citizen Sustainability Awards. At Nestlé, sustainability is at the heart of everything we do, and it is an honour to be able to demonstrate our sustainability journey at a platform of this stature and be inspired by how Sri Lanka is moving forward in the realm of sustainability. The past few years have had its fair range of challenges, and it required everyone, including us corporates, to review and reinvent our strategies. Nonetheless, I am proud that we were able to continue our untiring efforts of doing good together, creating a more sustainable and resilient Sri Lanka with our stakeholders across and beyond the value chain. Staying true to our promise of ‘Good food, Good life’, we will forge ahead towards achieving our ambitious sustainability commitments whilst being a force for good in Sri Lanka, as we have for over 115 years!” said Bernie Stefan, Managing Director of Nestlé Lanka.

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.