Assuming office as Finance Minister while being a relative newcomer to politics

“Historically the rise and the growth of the Parliamentary system can be traced to Finance”

On April 6, 2004 I was appointed the Minister of Finance of the UPFA government by President CBK. It was a singular honour for a MP who had not spent many years in Parliament unlike the “seniors” who usually lay claim to such positions. It was even more of a responsibility when considering that my predecessors were outstanding political figures such as JR Jayewardene, MDH Jayawardene, NM Perera and Ronnie de Mel.

In fact one of the first to congratulate me was Ronnie de Mel who in his beautiful handwriting expressed happiness [or was it relief ?] that a (onetime member of the Ceylon Civil Service) was chosen to be at the helm of the Finance Ministry. After Premadasa there was a tendency for Presidents and Prime Ministers to also hold that office and thereby emasculate the Finance Ministry which common sense suggested should have a full time worker in the engine room of the government. This habit was initially followed by CBK as well.

But after she was abandoned by her two deputies in the Finance Ministry – GL and SB Dissanayake, she may have decided to appointed me particularly because I had intervened regularly in Parliament on financial issues. She sent AS Jayawardene and PB Jayasundera to my home to brief me on UNP Budgets so that I could speak on behalf of the party. Further I had been a member of her “Kitchen Cabinet” and was not affiliated to any special party clique. So there was no opposition to my appointment.

But the beginning was traumatic. Almost soon after taking oaths I had to leave for South Korea where the Asian Development Bank was meeting in Jeju island. Sujatha Cooray, the Director of the Foreign Resources division, was already there and Ambassador Wijesiri was in Seoul ready to accompany me to Jeju. Before leaving I announced that we will be reducing the price of fertilizer by Rs. 200 a cwt as we had promised during the election campaign. I did so particularly because the JVP was getting ready to unilaterally make such an announcement.

This was known to Mano Tittawella who may have briefed CBK about it. PB Jayasundera had reacted badly to my initiative and had complained to CBK and sought a transfer to another Ministry. He was used to working directly with CBK which was one reason that GL and SB as deputies in the Treasury had decided to leave the government. CBK had approached my friend Nigel Hatch and asked him to inform me to make up with PBJ and in any case come back forthwith before a crisis broke out because the media was speculating that Mangala and I were likely to exchange portfolios.

I met CBK on my return and assured her that I will sort it out with PB. She went into a long explanation about PB’s SLFP sympathies and I knew that this perhaps was the reason for the alienation of many SLFP ministers from her (In parenthesis this problem cropped up again during Gotabaya’s presidency. PB was foisted on Gota by Mahinda and Basil. Soon the new President’s men were complaining that they could not get on with PB. Finally he was removed but it was too late). Anyway PB and I had a long discussion and decided to bury the hatchet.

During my absence PB had obtained CBK’s approval to move out several officials from the Treasury on the grounds that they were UNP supporters and he could not work with them. Now that the deed was done there was no big issue with me and PB was able to get Abeysinghe from the SLAS and Attygalle and several of his supporters from the Central Bank to move over to the Treasury. I must say in fairness that the new appointees were very competent and were willing to work as a team. Cliqueism had been the bane of the Finance Ministry during the Choksy regime. From now on all of us worked well together through many challenges and our 2005 Budget was acclaimed by many. This solidarity became a great asset when we had to confront the fall out from the Tsunami of December the same year. It was an unprecedented calamity and we had to bear the brunt of obtaining funding for recovery and rehabilitation. At the same time the Customs department and Banks which were supervised by our Ministry, had to service “ad hoc” donations big and small that flooded the country. We worked as a team and perhaps PB was justified in insisting on a reliable support staff.

After the recapture of Jaffna by our armed services the LTTE retreated to its base in the Wanni and with its network of “sleepers” in the south unleashed mayhem including an attack on Katunayake in which several of the new jet aircraft of Sri Lankan airways were blown up. The Dalada Maligawa which is the most sacred site of the Buddhists was attacked and Anuruddha Ratwatte, who had earlier officiated as its lay guardian, had to offer his symbolic resignation. Tragedy reached the Cabinet itself when a senior Minister CV Gooneratne, who had excused himself half way through a Cabinet meeting to attend a political event , was blown to bits while leading a procession of his voters. It was particularly poignant for me because CV had stood next to me a few hours before at a flag hoisting ceremony at the Presidential Secretariat.

Ranil’s administration in the 2001-2004 period had managed a recovery of the economy but again the demands of the armed services had to be given priority cutting into the space for fiscal consolidation. It seemed a cruel irony that CBK, who was intent on a negotiated settlement of the ethnic problem, should bear the brunt of Prabhakaran’s attacks. On one occasion when Katunayake airport was under attack and UL planes were being blown up, the Cabinet which was sitting in President’s House was given a ball by ball description over the phone by Jeyaraj Fernandopulle who had been intercepted while traveling to Colombo and taken to Katunayake.

Our exchange earners like tourism, remittances and traditional exports had all declined. All her attempts at restructuring the economy had not yielded the desired results and it was left to the UNP regime to bring the economy into positive territory. Our aim was to improve on that and bring our growth rate to 5.5 percent of GDP.

We decided to consult all economic sectors in formulating the 2005 Budget. There were about seven clusters based on shared economic activities whose requests were closely examined by the Treasury staff. In addition all the trade chambers discussed their problems with us. In both cases their requests were mainly related to tax concessions. But we were conscious of the need to enhance revenue in the light of demands by the military and the need to commit more funds as capital expenditure. We aimed at a significant increase of revenue. Capital expenditure was enhanced and the outlays on education, health and employment creation were increased.

The budgetary deficit was contained at seven percent of GDP which was an improvement on previous targets. [1998 – 9.2%, 1999 – 7.5%, 2000 – 9.9%, 2001 – 10.8%, 2002 – 10.8%, 2003 – 8.9% and 2004-8.0%]. Following the earlier CBK budgets every attempt was made to rationalize government expenditure by restructuring loss making state enterprises. An outstanding success was the establishment of the Sri Lanka Telecom as a joint venture with NTT of Japan. With the assistance of the ADB we planned to “unbundle” the Ceylon Electricity Board [CEB] which was a drain on the national coffers. High cost of energy was a significant factor in our inability to attract foreign investment.

Since the Minister concerned – Susil Premajayantha – was lukewarm regarding this reform agenda, CBK was even contemplating taking over the Ministry herself. But by then Susil had won over Prime Minster Mahinda Rajapaksa to his cause. So we had to postpone restructuring the CEB and await the passage of the Appropriations Bill till we moved again in this matter. The JVP was also opposed to such reform. I invited their leaders and PB to my home to explain the advantages of restructuring the CEB. But they were adamant in opposing change. This presaged the difficulties we were to face with the JVP on the economic front later.

In retrospect we can now see how damaging to the country such resistance to reform has been. ‘That was the main reason for our later bankruptcy. I have no regrets for calling those inefficient Corporations the “Five Monsters” who had to be tamed if the country’s economy was to be rehabilitated. Even CBK jokingly told me that I had gone too far in calling them “Kalakannis“. As to be expected the CEB workers went on strike asking me to withdraw my statement. I did no such thing and the strikers went back to work.

The Budget for 2005 was presented by me in Parliament with due ceremony. The general reaction was that it was a popular Budget. The backbenchers led by Wimal Weerawansa and Dilan Perera came in a delegation to express their satisfaction and as one MP said, “We clapped so much at the announcement of different concessions that our hands hurt”. In my presentation to the Development Forum I set out a summary of our budget objectives as follows:

“The new development strategy is premised on pro-poor, pro-growth income improvement and redistribution policies with complementary participation of a socially responsible private sector and a strong public sector. What then are the goals that we want to achieve? A sustainable six to eight percent growth in real income is targeted for the next five years. This requires raising investment to around 30 percent of GDP. Such investments include domestic and foreign investments as well as public investment. The ultimate objective is to ensure that Sri Lanka steadily progresses towards an upper middle income country within the next 10 years. Despite the oil hike and prolonged drought the Sri Lankan economy registered a 5.4 percent growth last year and reached a per capita income level of US Dollars 1,030 in 2004”.

The Government Parliamentary group passed a resolution thanking me and CBK for giving relief to the “poor man”. The UNP was out flanked and the “piece de resistance” was that Bogollagama, an influential UNP MP who sat next to Ranil at the beginning of the proceedings, crossed over to our side while the Budget speech was being delivered. It was a well choreographed Parliamentary drama which was carried live on TV. It embarrassed the UNP leadership no end. Bogollagama was made Minister of Rural Banking – a subject as we saw earlier, was close to PBJ’s heart. CBK’s letter of commendation to me on the success of our presentation came with a case of champagne which I shared with the senior staff of the Treasury.

Rebuilding Sri Lanka’s Farming After Cyclone Ditwah: A Reform Agenda, Not a Repair Job

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.