Farmers’ woes signal food shortages

Vegetable prices have plummeted at the special economic centres, which serve as collection hubs in predominantly agricultural areas, such as Dambulla, because most trucks cannot operate for want of diesel. Farmers are unable to dispose of their produce due to transport problems. Usually, it is in February, March and early April that farmers save some money for the traditional New Year. However, vegetable prices have increased elsewhere due to high transport costs and supply disruptions caused by a diesel scarcity, but farmers gain nothing from these price hikes, which benefit only traders. The prices of imported food items are also soaring due to increasing shipping costs caused by the Middle East war. Importers who have built stocks in view of the Avurudu season will laugh all the way to the bank.

Unsold vegetable stocks are discarded as there are no storage facilities. It is a crime to let food items go to waste. Successive governments have ignored the need to help farmers store their produce properly and reduce post-harvest waste. In April 2025, President Anura Kumara Dissanayake and Indian Prime Minister Narendra Modi opened the Dambulla Agricultural Storage Complex with a capacity of 5,000 metric tons. It is reportedly equipped with temperature and humidity control mechanisms to reduce post-harvest losses by approximately 40%, stabilise fluctuations in agricultural product prices, ensure the supply of high-quality food to consumers and enhance agricultural sustainability. This storage facility, which would have been a boon to farmers in the area, is still not operational, some Opposition politicians who visited it have told the media.

The transport problems faced by the farming community are not due to high fuel prices alone. Transporters and farmers cannot obtain diesel because the government is supplying huge amounts of diesel to the oil-fired power plants, which are working overtime to make up for a shortfall in coal-fired electricity generation due to the procurement of substandard coal for the Norochcholai power plant. Paddy farmers have been left without diesel for harvesting and therefore the cost of harvesting has increased, and this increase is bound to reflect in the prices of rice.

Former Director of Agriculture K. B. Herath told the media yesterday that the prices of parboiled rice and samba may increase to Rs. 300 and Rs. 400, respectively in June/July due to a sharp drop in the paddy yield, and the situation would take a turn for the worse owing to a fertiliser shortage.

The government has been compelled to restrict the distribution of fertiliser for paddy cultivation. Commissioner General of the Department of Agrarian Development said yesterday fertiliser would be issued only through the Agrarian Service Centres to prevent hoarding. Such measures become unavoidable during crises. However, the irony of the proposed method of restricting fertiliser distribution may not have been lost on the discerning public. The JVP, which leads the incumbent government, has become reliant on the Agrarian Service Centres, 240 of which it destroyed in the late 1980s. If only it had realised the value of these institutions at that time and spared them!

Meanwhile, the closure of the Hormuz Strait has adversely impacted the global fertiliser supply. The Persian Gulf is also a major hub of global fertiliser production and exports. Iran, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, and Oman are among the world’s leading exporters of nitrogen fertilisers, including urea and ammonia, accounting for roughly 30–35 percent of global urea exports and around 20–30 percent of ammonia exports, according to the Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) of the UN. Overall, up to 30 percent of global fertiliser exports are channelled through the Strait of Hormuz, the closure of which has severely affected international fertiliser supply chains. Production cuts and shipping constraints have stalled an estimated 3–4 million tonnes of fertiliser trade per month, and global fertiliser prices could average 15–20 percent higher during the first half of 2026 if the crisis continues, FAO says. This is a frightening proposition, as we said in a previous editorial comment. There is no gainsaying that Sri Lanka has to manage the available fertiliser stocks carefully in view of the global supply disruptions, but a drop in the fertiliser application will surely cause a countrywide yield decline.

If the current fertiliser scarcity persists, the farming community will have to combine the application of available chemical fertiliser with organic amendments, which the incumbent government leaders berated the previous administration for promoting.

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.