Brandix first to commit to UN program on Gender-based Violence and Women in Leadership

Group Managing Director Hasitha Premaratne (centre) signs Brandix’s commitment to the United Nations program on Gender-based Violence and Women in Leadership, flanked by Chief People Officer Sahad Mukthar (right) and Senior General Manager Corporate Finance Nishani Aponso

Apparel giant Brandix, has become the first private sector entity from Sri Lanka to commit to the United Nations program on Gender-based Violence and Women in Leadership and has been recognised as a leading Achiever by the United Nations Women’s Empowerment Principles (WEP) Gender Gap Analysis survey.

Brandix said it continues to lead efforts to inspire and empower women across all walks and leads the way by converting policy into practice. At Brandix 80% of the Group’s workforce consists of women, and its facility in India is recognised as the single largest employer of women in the country.

The WEP’s Gender Gap Analysis Tool found Brandix to have developed and implemented policies and practices across business functions, including inclusive talent practices with adequate measurement and reporting. Brandix scored full points for Professional Development and Promotions, Health safety and Hygiene, plus, Access to Quality Health Services. Non-Discriminatory and Equal Opportunity Policy, CSR and Advocacy to Support Gender Equality, Recruitment and actions against Violence, Harassment and Sexual Exploitation were other areas that Brandix scored high on. The company also scored above average with Leadership Commitment and Equal Compensation for all.

The WEPs are seven principles offering guidance on how to promote gender equality and women’s empowerment in the workplace, marketplace and community. Jointly established by UN Women and UN Global Compact, the WEPs are informed by international labour and human rights standards and grounded in the recognition that businesses have a stake in, and a responsibility for, gender equality and women’s empowerment.

Since inception – over 50 years ago – Brandix has had strong female leadership supported by an enabling environment helping women to thrive. The company’s EDI Strategy is titled ‘RISING Together’, which supports Inclusion, Diversity and Equity to Accelerate (IDEA), and is founded on the pillars of Gender Equity, An Inclusive and Respectful Workplace and Generational Diversity. Initiatives include customised programs at all levels including their own programs and others conducted in partnership with customers. Brandix also offers a strong mental well-being structure with counsellors at every operating location, to ensure all employees can feel psychologically safe and supported, plus, create spaces where equal partners come together to do meaningful work.

Gender equity is actively promoted within the company, and Brandix strives to create a safe, diverse and inclusive workplace. Women enjoy equitable representation in the Group’s leadership development programs. The ‘RISE for HER’ mentoring initiative, launched in 2022, supports women in their career development journey, providing networking opportunities and resources for life events to foster a balanced work-life environment. In 2023, women at Brandix enjoyed 7,960 training hours, one of the highest in the country, with 79% of recipients being executives and non-executives. Additionally, over 9,000 women at Brandix have benefitted from the PACE (Personal Advancement and Career Enhancement) program in partnership with its customers.