Sri Lanka presidential election candidates cast vote, speak to media

ECONOMYNEXT — Sri Lanka presidential election candidates Ranil Wickremesinghe, Sajith Premadasa and Anura Kumara Dissanayake cast their votes Saturday September 21 morning.

Speaking to an Indian reporter at his local polling booth, President Wickremesinghe said he plans to develop Sri Lanka.

“My hopes are for Sri Lanka, that we’ll have a developed Sri Lanka. As I said, Sri Lanka can and Sri Lanka will,” he said.

Noting that this election is being framed as a contest between the old guard and a new political formation, the journalist asked Wickremesinghe to comment.

“No, no, no, the old guard ran away. I’m putting a new (policy? unclear) for Sri Lanka,” Wickremesinghe responded.

“I’ve already delivered. I’ve taken this country out of bankruptcy. I will now deliver Sri Lanka with a developed economy, a developed social system and a developed political system where leaders don’t run away, ” he said.

Speaking to other reporters after casting his vote, Wickremesinghe said his administration has stabilised the government and the democratic system.

“Therefore we’re in a position now for people to exercise their franchise to determine their future. It is essential that we protect democracy and we don’t allow the democratic system to fall apart. I’m happy that I’ve been able to make a major contribution to that,” he said.

Opposition leader Premadasa also spoke to the media briefly after casting his vote, but declined to elaborate since a “silent period” for campaigning was still in effect until 4pm when the polls closed.

“It’s a very crucial election, but I also don’t want to violate any election laws because the election is still in progress. After the whole process is concluded I can answer questions,” said Premadasa.

“As you know, the past 24 hours… I mean we have to protect the law of the land, the election laws. All I can say is democracy will be victorious and for everyone to be very calm and collected and promote and champion democracy,” he said.

National People’s Power (NPP) leader Dissanayake said this election will be one that will change the country’s history. (Colombo/Sep21/2024)