Two Loyal, Noble Beings

As reported by Jeffrey Fettleman and Maya Taleki in conversation with the bold PM of Denmark in Greenland, Mette Frederiksen, Denmark’s leader, has taken big risks standing up to President Trump. The first incident they narrate is how this intrepid woman, then a school girl, stood up to a pack of skinheads who bullied some immigrants and got socked in her jaw. She never tolerated bullies since. As the authors say, she ducked a punch, a big one, from no less a person that Donald Trump.

Yes, you know all about that. Even before he was voted in as Pres of the US, Trump said he would annex Greenland for the US as a defence strategy, never mind it was governed by Denmark as an autonomous region moving from being a colony of the Kingdom of Denmark. He has repeatedly said he would even buy Greenland from Denmark. In a speech to the world’s financial elite at Davos, Trump said he would not use force to acquire that country. Later he said that NATO leaders and he had worked out “the framework of a future deal” that would “make everyone happy.” Why he mellowed was because of Congressional opposition and falling stock markets back home.

For months, Ms. Frederiksen has played a nervous game of brinkmanship with Mr. Trump, and it looks like she has won — for the moment. She has strongly refused the use of military bases in Greenland under the US sovereignty, excluding other nations. She has taken many risk with Trump. She may win.

My title said Two loyal, noble beings. Yes, one is a woman, the other – a dog. Maybe you guessed correct. Its Aloka the dog who has trotted more than 2000 km across several states in the US from Texas to Washington DC to be reached in early February.

The woman has reached a pinnacle since she will not allow Trump to grab Greenland as a possession of the US. Her pinnacle is not just of power but as a woman who cannot stand bullies and faces them squarely. For whose sake those problems? Solely for the sake of justice, ant-bullying and her nation.

The dog – his doggesness, his loyalty and such admirable qualities bought over from previous births. His fame he earned by accompanying 19 Buddhist monks on their Walk for Peace which has been world news for so many days now.

Aloka means light, He is no guiding light or lead. He is a follower but ever so loyal and committed to his task. Bhikkhu Pannakkara is the leader of the march. Aloka can be the show and most popular of the lot. Their message is of course peace but convey the messages of compassion, healing and universal connection, so needed in this world. The Americans of all types, mostly materialistic, have been very impressed and crowded round the monks who receive alms and speak to the people gathered.

Aloka got a dog disease in his foot and was still walking with the monks. They stopped and arranged for medical treatment. Before long he was again with them. His commitment so strong. He is a mongrel from India who follows momks on marches and managed to enter the States in spite of Trump.

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.