Colombo Stock Exchange receives ‘Great Place To Work’ certification for 4th consecutive year

The Colombo Stock Exchange (CSE) announces that it has received the ‘Great Place To Work’ certification for the 4th consecutive year in a row, having received the certification in 2022, 2023, 2024 and now once again in 2025. This prestigious certification underscores the CSE’s consistent commitment to fostering a welcoming, inclusive and safe environment.

“At CSE, our people are our greatest strength.” stated Rajeeva Bandaranaike CEO of the CSE, “We’ve worked hard to foster a workplace where fairness, respect, and pride thrive — and earning the Great Place to Work Certification for the fourth time in a row is a reflection of that commitment. It’s a celebration of the culture we’ve built together.”

Great Place to Work®, the organization that awarded the certification, has set the standard in over 180+ countries and regions and represents over 20 million employees and 22,000 companies.

Earning this certification for the 4th consecutive year demonstrates CSE’s steadfast commitment to its core values: Professionalism, Integrity, Care, Passion and Teamwork. The CSE’s advocacy for equality and inclusivity has produced a stable, welcoming and sustainable workplace for its employees and cultivated a work culture that respects diversity and promotes equal opportunities for its employees irrespective of race, gender or creed.

This steady stride to create a discrimination-free workplace remains a top priority for CSE as it fulfils its commitment to better representation of women, having employed women far above the market average.

The survey to award the certification is undertaken anonymously amongst employees with a rubric composed of five elements – credibility, respect, fairness, pride and camaraderie. In the survey CSE scored highly, with 94% of employees finding CSE offers a safe work environment.

CSE looks forward to maintaining this high standard of excellence and fostering a culture of hospitality for its employees, nurturing them to provide excellent service for the public.

The Sri Lanka–Japan Business Council leads successful delegation to Japan

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.