Ukraine’s Zelenskiy dismisses Prime Minister Svyrydenko after only a year

Reuters - Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelenskiy said on ​Sunday he planned to replace Prime Minister Yulia Svyrydenko after only a year in office, triggering the resignation ‌of the government.

Zelenskiy did not specify who he would ask to lead the government or what Svyrydenko's new position would be, but added that there would also be changes among the heads of law enforcement agencies.

He said the changes ​were needed to "ensure the implementation of an updated political strategy", but gave no further details.

"I ​am grateful to Yuliia for her clear, steady, and effective work as Prime Minister, ⁠for her years of productive service on Ukraine's team, and I have offered her the opportunity ​to lead a new and important area of relations with a key partner," Zelenskiy said on X.

"I ​expect that, together with MPs, we will make the corresponding changes in the Government of Ukraine."

Svyrydenko, an economist, was appointed in July 2025 after a year as deputy head of Zelenskiy's office and then four years as ​deputy prime minister responsible for economic development and trade.

Zelenskiy also did not explain the reasons for ​the proposed changes among law enforcement leaders.

Over the past year, Ukraine has been shaken by its largest corruption scandal, which ‌led ⁠to the resignation of the influential head of the presidential administration.

The so-called Midas case, which authorities say involved a $100 million kickback scheme at the state nuclear power company Energoatom, has engulfed figures close to Zelenskiy and cast a shadow over the government at a time when Kyiv wants to show Western allies that ​it can tackle high-level ​corruption.

Authorities have accused Timur Mindich, ⁠Zelenskiy's former business partner, of leading the kickback scheme and also named Zelenskiy's former chief of staff Andriy Yermak as a suspect. Both have denied ​wrongdoing.

Under Ukrainian law, the prime minister's resignation needs the approval of parliament, and ​entails the ⁠resignation of the entire government.

Lawmakers say possible successors include Svyrydenko's predecessor, Energy Minister Denys Shmyhal; Defence Minister Mykhailo Fedorov; and Serhiy Koretskyi, head of the state energy company, Naftogaz.

Well informed opposition lawmaker Yaroslav Zhelezniak said Koretskyi ⁠had the ​strongest chance of being nominated as the new head of ​government, and that Svyrydenko was likely to take up the post of ambassador to the United States.

Olga Stefanishyna, who was appointed ​last August, is currently the ambassador to Washington.