Gabo Travels in partnership with Trafalgar Tours hosts an evening of celebration

Gabo Travels, in partnership with Trafalgar, recently hosted an exclusive event to celebrate and appreciate their long-standing clientele at the prestigious Kingsbury Hotel. The event, titled ‘The Big Travel Show,’ was organized to introduce new travel destinations and tours by Trafalgar. The event featured a variety of activities, including live music and a dinner buffet, ensuring an unforgettable experience for all attendees.

The event was graced by the presence of key representatives from Trafalgar, including Mae Cheah, Managing Director, Asia, TTC Tour Brands and Wong Tsui Shan, Regional Director of Sales, Asia, TTC Tour Brands. Their presence added significant value to the occasion, symbolising solidarity and strength between Gabo Travels and Trafalgar.

The highlight of the evening was a raffle draw which saw Mae Cheah and Wong Tsui Shan present gifts to guests. The grand prize winner received a Trafalgar 7-day tour of Prague, Vienna and Budapest. Guests were also introduced to exciting new packages and tours on offer by Trafalgar, highlighting the exclusive travel experiences.

Mae Cheah shared her positive impressions of Sri Lanka, stating, “I love coming back to Sri Lanka I am truly captivated by the beauty and warmth of the people and the country. Trafalgar is excited to introduce new and improved offerings that will allow our clients to unlock the wonders of the world with unforgettable experiences, get to know the locals and have everything taken care of every step of the way.”

Shamala Cooray of Gabo Travels also addressed the attendees, emphasizing the enduring partnership between Gabo Travels and Trafalgar. “Our long-standing collaboration with Gabo Travels has been instrumental in delivering exceptional travel experiences to our clients. We look forward to continuing this journey together, offering unparalleled service and unforgettable travel memories.”

A new institutional framework to enhance Sri Lanka’s industrial sector

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.