BASL rejects allegations by Jagath Abeynayaka over discussions on extending judges’ tenure

Colombo, Aug. 11 (Daily Mirror) - The Bar Association of Sri Lanka (BASL) rejected concerns raised by Attorney-at-Law Jagath Abeynayaka regarding the BASL’s discussions on the proposed extension of the retirement age of Supreme Court and Court of Appeal judges, while urging him to raise such matters through the Association’s established institutional processes.

In a letter dated August 11, 2026, addressed to Abeynayaka, BASL President Rajeev Amarasuriya and Secretary Nalin De Silva said the Association was constrained to note that his letter dated August 10 had appeared on social media, particularly Facebook, even before the BASL had an opportunity to formally consider its contents.

The BASL noted that Abeynayaka was a supporter of the National People’s Power (NPP) Government and currently held an appointment as a Director of a Government institution.

However, it stressed that political affiliations should not influence the manner in which a member engages with the BASL or performs responsibilities within its governing bodies.

The BASL said its Constitution expressly prohibits a member of its Executive Committee or any other Executive Committee member, from a recognised political party from serving on the BASL Executive Committee, reflecting the importance attached to maintaining the Association’s independence from political parties.

According to the BASL, matters concerning the Association are considered through an established process, with issues ordinarily being considered first by the Executive Committee and subsequently by the Bar Council, and sometimes by the wider membership.

The BASL expressed regret that although Abeynayaka’s letter had been dated and publicly circulated on August 10, he had not attended the Executive Committee meeting held that day, where the matter could have been raised and discussed with fellow members.

As a result, the Executive Committee was unable to consider the concerns raised by him with his participation and had to defer consideration of the matter to a future meeting.

The BASL also criticised the decision to communicate the concerns publicly before availing himself of its internal processes.

The BASL nevertheless assured that it would continue, to the best of its ability, to discharge its responsibilities in accordance with its Constitution and objectives, including maintaining the honour and independence of the Bar and extending cooperation and support towards maintaining the honour and independence of the Judiciary.

The BASL observed that the next Supreme Court judge due to retire is the Chief Justice, whose retirement is due on December 1, 2026. It further noted that since the present Government assumed office, six Supreme Court judges, including two Chief Justices, had retired without any proposals being made at the relevant time to extend their respective tenures.

Against this background, the timing of the present proposal had inevitably given rise to public speculation, including statements suggesting that the proposed Constitutional amendment was intended, or could have the effect of enabling, the incumbent Chief Justice to remain in office for a further period.

The BASL further stressed that a distinction must be drawn between legitimate criticism or public discussion concerning a proposed Constitutional amendment and statements that improperly descend into personal attacks against individual members of the Judiciary.

The BASL said its opposition to the proposed extension of judges’ retirement age had always been based on matters of principle concerning judicial independence, the integrity of Constitutional processes and the maintenance of public confidence in the administration of justice.

It further said that Constitutional changes affecting the judicial tenure should be approached with the “greatest care, transparency and institutional consultation” and in a manner that does not create room for speculation that such changes are being applied to particular individuals.

The BASL called on Abeynayaka, as a member of its Executive Committee, to engage with this and other matters concerning the Association through its established institutional processes.