Dayasiri’s SLFP inks MoU to support Sajith

SJB leader Sajith Premadasa says signing of the MoU is not merely start of an opportunistic political quest for power

Emphasises that SJB and SLFP are coming together due to their shared policies and goals

SLFP’s Dayasiri Jayasekara urges public to support Premadasa emphasising that only he possesses strength to lead SL forward

Requests Premadasa to support SLFP’s efforts to rebuild party once he is elected President

The Sri Lanka Freedom Party (SLFP) faction, led by General Secretary Dayasiri Jayasekara, signed a Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) with the Samagi Jana Balawegaya (SJB) yesterday, committing to support Sajith Premadasa’s candidacy in the upcoming Presidential election.

The MoU was signed during a ceremony in Battaramulla, attended by party leaders, clergy, and supporters.

In his address at the event, SJB Presidential hopeful Sajith Premadasa said that the signing of the MoU is not merely the start of an opportunistic political quest for power. He emphasised that the SJB and SLFP are coming together due to their shared policies and goals.

“Joining a Government led by us means putting aside family bandyism, nepotism, and cronyism to focus on serving the people and commencing an exemplary political journey,” Premadasa said. The SJB leader clarified that the MoU does not include any stipulations regarding the allocation of ministerial posts or other positions. “This MoU is truly a sign of a system change,” he said, adding that it will not undermine the SJB’s program or policies.

Jayasekara at the event urged the public to support Sajith Premadasa in the upcoming Presidential election, emphasising that he possesses the strength to lead the country forward, unlike older politicians. “Therefore, prepare for this change and empower us. We are ready to rebuild this nation,” Jayasekara declared.

Jayasekara also reflected on the challenges faced by the SLFP in the past, noting that the party had signed an agreement in 2019 to support former President Gotabaya Rajapaksa, which led to significant issues for the party. “Despite facing numerous obstacles, threats, and even monetary offers in exchange for their support, SLFP organisers and members have made the decision to stand with you today,” he said.

He further mentioned that many regional leaders within the party have endorsed the decision to support Sajith Premadasa and expressed their approval of the move.

Jayasekara also requested Sajith Premadasa to support the SLFP’s efforts to rebuild the party once he is elected President. “We will organise 14,020 meetings nationwide and conduct door-to-door campaigns in support of you,” he assured.