JICA Senior Vice President Hara visits Sri Lanka

JICA Senior Vice President Shohei Hara with Prime Minister Dr. Harini Amarasuriya

From left: JICA Sri Lanka Chief Representative Shigeo Honzu, UN Assistant Secretary-General and UN Global Compact CEO Sanda Ojiambo, JICA Senior Vice President Shohei Hara, and Global Compact Network Sri Lanka Executive Director Rathika de Silva

Japan International Cooperation Agency (JICA) Senior Vice President Shohei Hara visited Sri Lanka this week to meet with senior Government officials and development partners and to discuss future cooperation in support of Sri Lanka’s sustainable development and economic recovery.

On 11 August, Hara met with Prime Minister Dr. Harini Amarasuriya, Treasury Secretary Dr. Harshana Suriyapperuma together with senior officials of the Finance Ministry, and other key stakeholders to exchange views on Sri Lanka’s development priorities and future cooperation between Sri Lanka and Japan.

During the meetings, Hara conveyed JICA’s condolences to those affected by Cyclone Ditwah and reaffirmed Japan’s continued commitment to supporting Sri Lanka’s economic recovery and sustainable development. Discussions also covered Sri Lanka’s facilitation of smooth implementation of on-going JICA supported projects, and opportunities and instruments to further strengthen bilateral cooperation.

Hara also met with United Nations Assistant Secretary-General and the United Nations Global Compact CEO Sanda Ojiambo and exchanged views on sustainable development and partnerships for achieving the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs).

During the visit Hara will travel to several parts of the country to gain first-hand insights into ongoing Japan-Sri Lanka cooperation. His program includes visits to JICA volunteer activity sites in Kurunegala and Kandy, areas affected by Cyclone Ditwah, the beneficiaries of the Sejaya Microcredit Company, and other key JICA supported-initiatives, including the Anuradhapura North Water Supply Project, the Sigiriya Museum, and the Doppler Weather Radar Project in Puttalam.

Sri Lanka is one of JICA’s most important partner countries and shares a longstanding relationship of friendship and cooperation with Japan. This visit reaffirms the strong partnership between Sri Lanka and Japan and provides an opportunity to exchange views on the country’s development priorities and future cooperation. JICA remains committed to supporting Sri Lanka’s efforts toward sustainable, inclusive, and resilient development and to further strengthening the longstanding friendship between the two countries.