SLGJA rings alarm bells on gradual migration of the gem and jewellery industry

The Sri Lanka Gem and Jewellery Association (SLGJA), is concerned that the imposition of high taxes, including the Value-Added Tax (VAT), is driving businesses in the gem and jewellery industry to be relocated to other, countries, which have more conducive environments for such business. The imposition of 18% VAT on the import of rough and finished gemstones -although they are primarily intended for reexport or to be value added and sold locally to visiting foreign visitors for foreign currency- has changed the dynamics of the industry to the detriment of its sustainability in Sri Lanka, the SLGJA said in a press release.

The release adds: ‘The SLGJA had previously warned that the imposition of 18% VAT would increase the risk of relocation to emerging competitor hubs like Dubai, India, Hong Kong and Thailand. Each of these countries maintain single-digit VAT rates for their respective gem and jewellery industries. This disparity is now on the verge of rendering Sri Lanka’s gem and jewellery industry uncompetitive, with the livelihoods of over 600,000 employees in the formal sector being in jeopardy.

‘It was previously revealed that 70% of Sri Lanka’s gem and jewellery exports rely heavily on imported precious, rough stones, due to customer preferences, colour design, and quality. Approximately 99.9% of gems are either exported or sold to visiting tourists. Additionally, imports of gems into Sri Lanka have also reduced greatly as a result of the VAT, which in turn has affected the jewellery manufacturers and lapidaries to the point of closure, therefore resulting in vast unemployment.

‘Ajward Deen, president of the Sri Lanka Gem and Jewellery Association explained, “These Taxes are a deterrent for dealers, who take risks with their own money. Banks do not provide loan facilities for this trade, which further complicates the situation for such businesses. It must be noted that the VAT on Foreign Currency Sales, consumed overseas, without any refund mechanism, is also discouraging sales to tourists and not being competitive. Additionally, reducing the 36% tax on net profit and 18% VAT on imported goods could make Sri Lankan gems and jewellery more competitive globally.”

ComBank ranked Most Respected Bank in Sri Lanka for 20th successive year

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.