Honouring Prince of Wales Distinguished Cadet Sergeants (1980–1986)

Becoming a Sergeant in a college platoon requires progressing through a demanding hierarchical process

Prince of Wales College, Moratuwa, is proudly approaching two historic milestones --  its 150th Anniversary and, the 125th Anniversary of its Cadet Platoon. The college has long been recognized for its proud cadet heritage, leadership tradition, and outstanding contribution towards producing distinguished personalities in both the Armed Forces and the corporate sector.

This article seeks to highlight the proud cadet legacy of the college and honour the distinguished Cadet Sergeants who contributed immensely towards strengthening the image and reputation of their alma mater during the period from 1980 to 1986.

Throughout its history, the college has produced many outstanding and dynamic personalities who successfully led the college platoon with discipline, courage, and commitment. Their leadership, commanding ability, and dedication greatly contributed towards shaping strong and resilient young individuals capable of handling responsibilities both within and beyond school life.

Becoming a Sergeant in a college platoon requires progressing through a demanding hierarchical process. Mentoring and leading a platoon through selection camps and annual camps, especially for the prestigious Hermann Loos Competition, is one of the most challenging responsibilities in a sergeant’s role. Beyond platoon duties, the platoon sergeant also has the opportunity to progress toward higher regimental responsibilities within the cadet corps based on leadership, performance, and eligibility.

PWC has produced many military men, including senior officers in the Armed Forces, who have contributed immensely to safeguarding the nation and addressing insurgencies and various national challenges over the decades. It is a privilege to highlight the following distinguished cadets who played a key role in strengthening the cadet legacy of the college.

From its early years to the present, the college cadet tradition has consistently produced duty-bound, unwavering and committed individuals who have gone on to serve the nation with distinction.

The following personalities have distinguished themselves as cadet sergeants from 1974, doing their school proud  -- Jagath Mahasen – Sergeant (1980), Captain Gethsri Peiris – Sergeant (1981), RQMS / 3rd Battalion (1982), Dampriya Gunathilaka – Sergeant (1982), Uditha Costa – Sergeant (1983), CSM / 3rd Battalion (1983), Srinath Fernando – Sergeant (1983),  Amarasiri Wijayasinghe – Sergeant (1984), Major General Suneetha Dunuwila – Sergeant (1985), CSM / 3rd Battalion (1986),   Major Thakshila Gamage – Sergeant (1986).