When a fish rots …

Minister of Health and Mass Media Dr. Nalinda Jayatissa mounted the high horse and went for a ride in Parliament yesterday. He read a newspaper group the riot act. What irked him beyond measure was a Sinhala newspaper report, which he described as a total fabrication aimed at discrediting the government. The news report said a police clearance certificate could not be obtained at present without a letter from the head of the Civil Security Committee in the police area. Opposition Leader Sajith Premadasa also said the same in Parliament yesterday. Denying that there was any such requirement, Minister of Public Security Ananda Wijepala said he would look into that allegation.

Minister Jayatissa waxed eloquent on media ethics and the people’s right to accurate information. He said the media must not publish anything based on unverified information, and faulted the aforesaid newspaper for having published the report at issue without ascertaining the views of the Ministry of Public Security and the Police. He also tore into a television station for having highlighted the news story. Let the newspaper and the television channel concerned engage in thrust and parry with the Media Minister; we intend to focus on the larger picture.

Interestingly, Minister Jayatissa, who extols the virtues of media ethics and the foundational principle of natural justice—audi alteram partem (‘listen to the other side’)—made a speech in Parliament, on Wednesday, based on an unsubstantiated claim by some websites that SLPP MP Namal Rajapaksa had not obtained a law degree from a British university and his enrollment at Sri Lanka Law College had been improper. He tabled the website reports in question, asking Namal, who was not present at the time, to respond. He had not cared to check the veracity of the stories before making them public through Parliament! Shouldn’t he have practised what he preaches, and listened to the other side (Namal) before tabling those documents? The Opposition has taken exception to another unsubstantiated claim made by President Anura Kumara Dissanayake in Parliament. It has said that if any media institution is involved in drug dealing, the President must take legal action against it instead of making allegations in Parliament. Doesn’t the Media Minister think the President should substantiate his claim and explain why no legal action has been taken based thereon? Has the government verified its oft-repeated claim that some Opposition politicians are involved in drug dealing?

We are not short of self-righteous politicians. When Minister Jayatissa went ballistic yesterday, tearing into some journalists of print and electronic media, SJB MP Ajith P. Perera rose in defence of them. He said the Media Minister spoke as if ‘possessed by Ranil Wickremesinghe’, who had launched into tirades against senior journalists. Curiously, the NPP failed to point out that MP Perera had been a member of the UNP-led Yahapalana government when Wickremesinghe, as the Prime Minister, misused his parliamentary privileges to demonise some journalists. None of the SJB MPs, while they were in the  Yahapalana government, defended the media when Wickremesinghe berated journalists. Intoxicated with power, Wickremesinghe once went so far as to claim that the visage of a youthful presenter of the above-mentioned television station resembled that of ‘Riri Yaka’ or ‘Demon of Blood’! The Opposition MPs’ defence of journalists and the government members’ tirades against the independent media show the Jekyll-and-Hyde personality of politicians. Not all politicians are bad—the good ones are either pushing up the daisies or out of power! It is popularly said in this country that ‘bale thiyanakota mole ne, mole thiyanakota bale ne’ (roughly rendered into English it means that ‘when one has power, one has no brains; when one has brains, one has no power’). The NPP leaders have exemplified this pithy saying.

Now that the Media Minister has urged journalists to respect the people’s right to information, shouldn’t he, as the Cabinet Spokesman, ask the government to disclose the contents of all MoUs and pacts it has entered into with the US, India, Japan and China? The mandate flaunted by the government to justify its actions has come from the people, whose right to information must be respected.

Meanwhile, the JVP, which leads the NPP government, has deep-sixed its ‘Revolutionary Policy Declaration’, which carries the imprimatur of its founding leader Rohana Wijeweera and inspired tens of thousands of its cadres who committed many crimes and met violent deaths in an abortive insurrection in the late 1980s. President Dissanayake, who is also the leader of the JVP, has publicly renounced statism in favour of a market-driven development model. Addressing a Ratnapura District Coordination Committee meeting a few weeks ago, he declared that the government must not engage in business, which, he argued, had to be left to the private sector. His government has drawn criticism for restructuring vital state institutions, which, trade unions say, is divestiture in all but name. So, the question is why the NPP government has not divested itself of the state media institutions.

A government that does not lead by example has no moral right to pontificate to others. A fish is said to rot from the head down.

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.