Govt urged to mobilise the economic power of women for betterment of Sri Lanka

Sri Lankan women ‘experiencing’ discrimination and disadvantages in achieving economic empowerment

Shortage of female participation ‘proving to be’ detrimental to Sri Lanka’s economic growth

Legislative reforms and mindset shifts urged to reduce barriers to women’s success in careers and enterprise

Dr. Roshan Perera (Chairperson, Women’s Policy Action Network), Shyamali Ranaraja (Attorney – at- law) and Gayani de Alwis (1st Vice Chairperson, Women’s Chamber of Industry and Commerce), last week explained to the media about the urgency of legislative reforms and societal mindset shifts to reduce barriers to women’s economic empowerment in Sri Lanka.

It was encouraging to see that these three women who have had every opportunity and blessing in their own life wanting the same for all Sri Lankan women.They were speaking at this media event co-hosted by the The Advocata Institute and the Kingdom of the Netherlands, on July 11 at the BMICH Colombo.

The event was titled “Unlocking Potential: Policies for Women’s Economic Empowerment”.

Dr. Perera outlined the establishment and objectives of the Women’s Policy Advocacy Network (WPAN). Emphasising the necessity for collective advocacy, she highlighted WPAN’s focus on six critical areas: land laws, labour laws, informal sector recognition, social infrastructure, women’s participation in the digital economy and financial inclusion which is elusive for women entrepreneurs.

“Although there are many agencies working in this space we felt it was necessary to bring all these efforts together to amplify the voice for change in this area ,” said Dr. Perera.

Shyamali Ranaraja addressed the precarious nature of employment for women, highlighting societal disincentives that hinder their return to the workforce post-childbirth and marriage. She pointed out that current legislation creates significant barriers for women re-entering the labour force, with another critical juncture occurring around age 50, coinciding with eligibility for EPF payments.

She emphasised the precariousness of available work for women, noting that domestic work was excluded from the 2016 minimum wage law, underscoring the need for formal recognition and enhanced protections for domestic workers. “If Sri Lanka itself does not provide women with basic pay for domestic work,” she questioned, “how can we ask other countries to pay expat domestic workers equally?”

“Saying women should be able to work at night without providing infrastructure for a solution is pointless”, she said. She suggested that simple legislative amendments could spur change. She proposed “New condominium developments should have child centres by law, which will have no bearing on state finances. Such a move will make a huge difference for women’s empowerment.”

“The Gender-Equality bill was written to fail – the legal terminology was not appropriate,” Ms. Ranaraja pointed out. She also highlighted that the few female representatives in government, despite representing an electorate that is more than 50 percent female, are publicly ridiculed and harassed by fellow male politicians in front of the entire nation. “The burden of implementing solutions must primarily rest on the state,” Ms. Ranaraja emphasised, connecting her advocacy for systemic changes in social infrastructure to broader societal and legislative reforms. This holistic approach, she suggested, is crucial to creating an environment where women can fully participate in and bene t from the workforce, addressing disparities and ensuring equitable opportunities across Sri Lanka.

Ms. de Alwis emphasised the critical role of mindset change in empowering women economically. “Laws are good, but how do we truly change the minds of people at a grassroots level?” asked Ms. de Alwis. She pointed out the challenges women face in accessing nance and the discouraging environment in nancial institutions. Sri Lanka’s ranking of 122 out of 146 countries in gender equality re ects signi cant disparities across economic participation, education, health outcomes, and political empowerment, as measured by the Global Gender Gap Index. “Awareness is key, ” Ms. de Alwis asserted. She called for increased support for female entrepreneurs and urged the inclusion of gender equality discussions at all levels of education to dismantle misogynistic viewpoints. “The issue of mindset change must be discussed at all levels,” she stressed, particularly at a school age level to remove ingrained stereotypes.

Remarkable surge in Agricultural Exports in first half of 2024 – Secretary to the Ministry of Agriculture and Plantation Industries

Best Western Elyon Colombo affirms growing potential of Indian tourists visiting Sri Lanka

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.