University of Jaffna  Convocation kicks off tomorrow

The 41st General Convocation of the University of Jaffna will be held from 6 to 8 October, with the ceremonies taking place over three days and nine sessions at the University Indoor Stadium.

The Convocation will be presided over by University of Jaffna Chancellor Emeritus Professor Rajaratnam Kumaravadivel, who will confer degrees, postgraduate degrees, diplomas, certificates, Gold medals, prizes, and scholarships on the graduates.

Graduates from 14 faculties will receive their awards at the Convocation. These include the Faculty of Graduate Studies, Faculty of Arts, Faculty of Science, Faculty of Agriculture, Faculty of Management Studies and Commerce, Faculty of Technology, Faculty of Engineering, Faculty of Medicine, Faculty of Hindu Studies, Faculty of Siddha Medicine, Sir Ponnambalam Ramanathan Faculty of Visual and Performing Arts, and the Faculties of Business Studies, Applied Science and Technological Studies of the former Vavuniya Campus of the University of Jaffna.

Graduates who have completed degree programs through the Centre for Open and Distance Learning of the University of Jaffna will also receive their degrees and certificates.

A total of 3,411 degrees will be awarded during the convocation, comprising 314 postgraduate degrees and diplomas, 2,680 degrees to internal students and 417 degrees to external students. In addition, 10 higher diplomas and diplomas, 24 certificates in Professional English, and one qualification certificate in Business Management will be awarded.

A total of 100 Gold medals, 63 prizes, and 15 scholarships will be awarded in recognition of academic achievement across the various degree programs. The University will also confer the prestigious Professor Alagiah Durairajah Gold Medals, awarded annually to outstanding students.

As part of the events associated with the Convocation, a post-Convocation cultural program will be held at the University’s Kailasapathy Auditorium on 10 October from 3 p.m.

Two distinguished memorial lectures will also be held at the Kailasapathy Auditorium on 15 October. The Sir Ponnambalam Ramanathan Memorial Lecture will be delivered at 3 p.m. by University of Jaffna Department of Art History Chair Professor T. Sanathanan. The Lady Leelawathi Ramanathan Memorial Lecture will follow at 4 p.m. and will be delivered by University of Jaffna Department of Sociology Senior Lecturer Dr. I.S. Bakeerathy.