Double standards by NGOs could give government greater justification for regulation – Cassilingam

Colombo, Oct. 7 (Daily Mirror) -  SLPP Jaffna District Organiser and Politburo Member Geethanath Cassilingam said organisations that advocate for human rights, due process and the rule of law have a responsibility to uphold those principles consistently, regardless of an individual’s political affiliation.

Commenting on concerns surrounding the arrest and detention of Opposition MP Namal Rajapaksa, Cassilingam said questions regarding the application of legal and procedural safeguards should be examined objectively and without political considerations.

“If we genuinely believe that due process, equal treatment and the protection of fundamental rights are essential to a democratic society, those principles must apply to everyone. They cannot become more or less important depending on who is involved,” he said.

Cassilingam said NGOs and civil society organisations that regularly raise concerns over alleged irregularities in arrests and legal proceedings should also be prepared to examine similar concerns when they arise in politically sensitive cases.

“When organisations are highly vocal in certain cases but appear less willing to engage with similar questions in other cases, it can create a perception of selective advocacy. Whether or not that perception is justified, it is something the civil society sector should take seriously,” he said.

He said this was particularly important given concerns raised by some NGOs regarding proposed legislation aimed at regulating the NGO sector.

“I respect the important role played by genuine and independent civil society organisations. At the same time, if NGOs call for transparency, accountability and independence from the Government, the public is entitled to expect those same standards from the organisations themselves,” Cassilingam said.

He said criticism of government regulation should be heard and considered, but added that the NGO sector must also recognise the importance of maintaining public confidence in its own independence and impartiality.

He further said he would not want legitimate NGOs or activists to face unnecessary restrictions because of the conduct or perceived bias of others. Civil society has an important role in a democracy, and that space must be protected, he said.

“However, when organisations appear to apply different standards depending on the individual or political group involved, it can undermine public confidence and, unintentionally, give greater justification to those calling for tighter regulation,” Cassilingam added.