Aitken Spence Printing celebrates consecutive wins

In an impressive display of excellence, Aitken Spence Printing received two ‘Bronze’ awards in the Digital Printing category at two prestigious industry events held in Vietnam and Indonesia. Notably, this recognition is an achievement among other competitors in the South-East Asian region.

The Company’s cutting-edge print quality and exceptional craftsmanship were recognized at the Asian Packaging Excellence Awards (APEA) that was recently held in Ho Chi Minh, Vietnam; followed closely by their success on the Asian Print Awards (APA) in Jakarta, Indonesia that was also held in November 2024. These consecutive wins not only highlight the company’s unwavering commitment to industry standards but also underscore their leadership in the digital printing sector. The awards serve as a powerful testament to the company’s dedication to delivering superior print quality, innovation, and precision, setting them apart as a trailblazer in the highly competitive Asian printing landscape.

“These awards are a testament to the hard work, dedication, and creativity of our entire team,” commented Deshantha Silva, Director/CEO of Aitken Spence Printing. “We are incredibly proud to be recognized for our excellence at this regional platform for both our printing and packaging services. These awards further encourage us to continue setting higher boundaries for innovation, quality, and sustainability in the printing and packaging industry”.

The annual Asian Print Awards was founded in 2001 by a Singapore Publishing company that specialize in Print related trade magazines – which was founded in 1988. The Asian Print awards recognize outstanding achievement in the print and packaging industries across Asia. Today the Asian Print Awards is run by the same team but under the banner off Asian Print Awards Management Pte Ltd, still run out of Singapore.

Nestlé promotes regenerative agricultural practices in the coconut value chain via Nestlé Coconut Development Plan

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.