Sri Lanka-China relations “Beyond Commerce”: Peking University delegation conducts in-depth research on bilateral cooperation in Colombo

A delegation led by Prof. Wang Weijia, Director of the Research Centre for Global Governance and International Communication at the Institute of Area Studies and Dean of the Institute of International Communication at Peking University, China, conducted a series of high-level research interviews in Colombo recently.

During their visit, the delegation met with several government and state sector representatives, members of legal fraternity, members of the armed forces and experts from leading international affairs think tanks, engaging in wide-ranging discussions on Sri Lanka-China cooperation.

At a meeting with Hanif Yusoof, Presidential Special Envoy on Foreign Investments and Governor of the Western Province, the delegation engaged in in-depth discussions on Sri Lanka’s international trade and investment landscape. Governor Yusoof noted that international trade and foreign direct investment are critical to Sri Lanka’s future economic growth, with logistics, energy, and tourism identified as priority sectors for attracting foreign capital.

He further highlighted the longstanding involvement of Chinese enterprises in Sri Lanka’s infrastructure, energy, road, and telecommunications sectors, noting their significant contribution to the country’s economic development. Looking ahead, he stressed that Sri Lanka should leverage its strategic geographic position to build regional supply chain networks and deepen cooperation with Chinese enterprises in export-oriented manufacturing.

Speaking with Dr. Harshana Suriyapperuma, Secretary to the Treasury and Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, the delegation explored various dimensions of the Sri Lanka-China relationship. Dr. Suriyapperuma emphasized that the two countries are bound by longstanding historical, cultural and sentimental ties that extend well “beyond commercial and transactions”.

In this context, he highlighted Port City Colombo as a symbol of the enduring partnership between Sri Lanka and China, and described the project as an important platform with the potential to contribute to Sri Lanka’s long-term economic growth and international connectivity.

During the interview with Dr. Sulakshana Jayawardena, Acting Chairman of the Board of Investment of Sri Lanka (BOI), discussions focused on Sri Lanka’s current investment landscape and potential new models for Sri Lanka-China cooperation.

Dr. Jayawardena noted that foreign direct investment (FDI) projects such as Port City Colombo generate both direct and indirect economic benefits, including foreign capital inflows, employment opportunities for local citizens, and technology transfer. Beyond infrastructure development, he noted that high-tech manufacturing, pharmaceuticals, and textiles should serve as key areas for deeper Sri Lanka-China cooperation.

Looking ahead, he hopes to leverage academic and think-tank institutions such as Peking University to create more platforms for mutual exchange and collaboration. In particular, he highlighted the value of learning from China’s experience in special economic zone governance, manufacturing development, and workforce training, with a view to exploring new avenues for deeper bilateral cooperation.

Throughout the visit, Prof. Wang introduced Peking University’s academic strengths in area studies and international communication to the officials and experts engaged during the delegation’s meetings. He also expressed the university’s commitment to conducting further research aligned with Sri Lanka’s development priorities, while fostering scholarly and cultural exchanges that strengthen mutual understanding and serve as a bridge between the two countries.

Amana Takaful concludes Rights Issue, raises over Rs. 1 billion

News of a road map to West Asian peace brings oil price relief

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.