Milestone in strengthening climate-resilient aquaculture, rural livelihoods

At the opening ceremony of the Tilapia Fish Semi-Processing Centre in Iranamadu, Kilinochchi, dignitaries including (from left) Cargills Ceylon Group Manager Agribusiness Haridas Fernando; ILO Country Office – Sri Lanka and the Maldives Director Joni Simpson; Embassy of Norway to India, Sri Lanka and Bhutan Second Secretary – Political Section Tormod Nuland; ILO Country Office – Sri Lanka and the Maldives Chief Technical Adviser Thomas Kring, and Embassy of Norway to India, Sri Lanka and Bhutan Program Officer Akanksha Khullar attended the event, marking an important milestone in strengthening sustainable livelihoods and value addition within the fisheries sector

Launch of Iranamadu Tilapia Culture Based Production and Semi-Processing Centre creates new pathways for women

The International Labour Organisation (ILO), in collaboration with Cargills (Ceylon) PLC and with support from the Government of Norway, launched the Iranamadu Tilapia culture-based production and semi processing centre in Sri Lanka’s Northern Province.

The new facility marks a significant milestone in strengthening climate-resilient aquaculture, expanding rural livelihoods, and creating decent employment opportunities for women in the region.

The ILO Country Office – Sri Lanka and the Maldives Director Joni Simpson said: “This processing centre represents what can be achieved when communities, government, development partners, and the private sector work together. It contributes not only to strengthening aquaculture value chains but also to advancing social justice by expanding access to decent and productive employment, especially for women and marginalised groups.”

Located in the Iranamadu freshwater fisheries hub, the centre was developed as an initiative under the ILO’s Promoting Advancement of Vulnerable Persons and Enterprises (PAVE) Project. Funded by the Government of Norway, the PAVE Project supported inclusive economic development and climate-resilient livelihoods in the North, with a strong emphasis on women, persons with disabilities, and vulnerable rural communities.

Embassy of Norway to India, Sri Lanka, and Bhutan Second Secretary – Political Section Tormod Nuland said: “ILO has been a longstanding partner for Norway through multiple projects. These have actively contributed towards the development of the Northern Province. Our current support through GROW is particularly significant as it aims to strengthen the socio-economic situation for people in the region and works across thematic areas such as gender equality, climate change, inclusivity, all of which remain a top priority for Norway. We are therefore delighted to see the launch of the new Tilapia processing unit, which is a key initiative of this project.”

A key feature of this new processing centre is its focus on women’s employment and skills development. The facility will create new, sustainable jobs in fish handling, processing and quality assurance, while also supporting training in food safety standards, value addition, and enterprise development. This will significantly expand women’s participation in the aquaculture value chain in the Northern Province.

The initiative builds on Cargills’ engagement in the tilapia sector, including pilot interventions to expand consumer demand for locally farmed tilapia through innovative recipes and integration into its national supermarket retail network.

Cargills Ceylon PLC Group Manager Agribusiness Haridas Fernando said:  “We are pleased to partner with the ILO on this important initiative to support the development of Sri Lanka’s inland fisheries sector, while strengthening livelihoods for small-scale fishing communities in the Northern Province. Over the years, Cargills has worked closely with agriculture and dairy farming communities across the Northern region, building a sustainable marketplace for local producers. This partnership marks our first major venture into inland fisheries development, and we see significant potential in supporting the growth of the tilapia industry as a source of affordable nutrition and protein for Sri Lankan consumers.”

By linking smallholder fisher communities with private sector markets, the Iranamadu Freshwater Fishermen’s Cooperative Society has gained improved market access and engaged with large private sector actors. Members of the Cooperative Society have highlighted the partnership as an important step in enhancing both economic opportunity and social recognition.

With continued support under the ILO’s Generating Resilient Opportunities for Work (GROW) Project – funded by the Government of Australia and the Government of Norway, these efforts will be further scaled to promote more climate resilient, inclusive and market-oriented livelihood systems in the Northern Province.

The GROW project builds on more than a decade of successful interventions under the ILO’s Jobs for Peace and Resilience (JPR) Program including the LEED, LEED+, EGLR, PAVE projects. Implemented from 2025 to 2028, focusing on creating lasting and inclusive employment through climate-resilient agriculture and aquaculture, social empowerment, and market system development, it is designed to deepen private sector partnerships, strengthen local enterprises, and create long-term and more sustainable opportunities for vulnerable communities, particularly women, to thrive economically and socially.