Sri Lanka’s Commercial Bank market cap tops one billion US dollars

ECONOMYNEXT  – Sri Lanka’s Commercial Bank has become the first listed lender to have a market capitalization in excess of a billion US dollars, with rising stock prices in the Colombo Stock Exchange.

Commercial Bank exceeded the billion dollar threshold with its stock price reaching 196.75 rupees in August 19, 2025 up from 144.75 rupees in December 2025.

The larger value will make it a large-cap stock with greater visibility and inclusion in institutional portfolios and index funds, Commercial Bank Chairman Mr Sharhan Muhseen said in a statement after a ‘bell ringing’ ceremony at the Colombo Stock Exchange.

“In addition to increased market recognition, the larger market capitalisation also improves our access to capital and credit markets, enabling us to pursue new opportunities, invest in innovation, and accelerate value creation for our shareholders,” he said

There are only two other companies that have crossed the billion dollar threshold, CSE Chairman Dimuthu Abeyesekera said.

“…[E]very billion-dollar company added to our market strengthens credibility, broadens investment appeal, and positions Sri Lanka more firmly on the global investment map,” he said.

In the second quarter of 2025 the Commercial Bank of Ceylon became the first private sector bank in Sri Lanka to surpass 3 trillion rupees in assets.

“It reflects the strength of our business model and the confidence our investors continue to place in us,” Commercial Bank Managing Director Sanath Manatunge said.

“We have always focused on equitable growth, balancing national economic and social imperatives, the aspirations of our customers and the creation of stakeholder value.”

Commercial Bank operates a network of strategically located branches and automated machines island-wide, and has the widest international footprint among

Commercial Bank also has a unit with 20 branches in Bangladesh, a Tier I Bank with a majority stake in the Maldives, a Microfinance company in Myanmar and a representative office within the Dubai International Financial Centre (DIFC).

The bank also has fully owned subsidiaries, CBC Finance Ltd. and Commercial Insurance Brokers (Pvt) Limited. (Colombo/Aug29/2025)