CSE’s 2025 annual report ranked as Sri Lanka’s No. 1

The Colombo Stock Exchange’s (CSE) 2025 annual report has been ranked as Sri Lanka’s top annual report for 2025, winning Gold for the third consecutive year at the USA’s League of American Communications Professionals (LACP) 2025 Vision Awards, in the Annual Report and Integrated Report (IR) Categories.

The CSE’s IR, themed ‘Where Confidence Meets Capital’, was ranked as Sri Lanka’s No. 1 annual report and earned a place among the Asia-Pacific region’s top 100 reports and secured the global Gold Industry Award for the third consecutive year.

The 2025 annual report highlighted the CSE’s strategic priorities, key achievements and long-term vision, demonstrating its leadership in navigating the evolving market conditions and embracing technological innovation.

The recognition reaffirmed the CSE’s position as a leading force in Sri Lanka’s financial sector and a benchmark for reporting excellence across the region.

“Being ranked as Sri Lanka’s No. 1 annual report and receiving the LACP Gold award for the third consecutive year is a proud affirmation of the CSE’s commitment to transparent, accountable and forward-looking reporting,” said Executive Vice President Finance, Listed Entity Compliance and Sustainability Kusal Nissanka.

“Our 2025 annual report reflects not only our performance but also the significant progress made in strengthening market infrastructure, expanding access, advancing digital reporting and supporting sustainable capital formation. This recognition encourages us to continue setting higher standards and building confidence among all stakeholders in Sri Lanka’s capital market.” The CSE saw several milestones in 2025, with the launch of its subsidiary CSE Clear (Pvt.) Ltd, which acts as Sri Lanka’s first Central Counterparty framework, the establishment of a branch in every province in the nation, thus ensuring countrywide access, the initiative to roll out the eXtensible Business Reporting Language for the listed entities in Sri Lanka as well as the mandated phased adoption of the SLFRS One and Two sustainability reporting standards.

Through the CSE’s introduction of the Green, Social, Sustainable and Sustainability Linked (GSS+) bond framework, the bourse has seen the market collectively raise approximately Rs.82 billion, representing nearly 40 percent of total debt capital raised through the CSE in 2025.

With a Sri Lankan capital market primed with an attractively competitive price-earnings ratio in a strengthened economy, the CSE continues to innovate in the Sri Lankan capital market. These successive back-to-back awards demonstrate the organisation’s professionalism and dedication to create a transparent and productive capital market, inspiring confidence abroad and domestically.

As Sri Lanka’s economy continues to strengthen and the capital market remains attractively valued, the CSE remains focused on driving innovation and enhancing market development. This string of prestigious international awards reflects the organisation’s unwavering commitment to transparency, professionalism and the advancement of an efficient capital market that inspires confidence among both the local and global investors.