IPL fireball: Here comes the sun…

June.05 (Mirror Sports) - Vaibhav Sooryavanshi who last week was declared as the Indian Premier League’s (IPL) most valuable player, arrived in Sri Lanka today with the India A team to contest a Triangular series that will also feature Afghanistan in Dambulla.

He will be on show on June 9 when India A captained by Tilak Varma takes on Sri Lanka A in the 50-over Triangular series opening match.

The 15-year old Sooryavanshi became the focus of world cricket when he blasted 776 runs for his Rajasthan Royals at the 2026 IPL with a strike rate of 237 and bagged as many as five awards one of which gave him a car that he will not be able to drive as he is still below the age of 18.

Like a thunderbolt from the blues for cricket followers in Sri Lanka, though not for many adoring fans in India, Sooryavanshi stormed cricket’s box office hammering the world’s best hardcore professional bowlers at the IPL which was born when he was not even conceived.

He left the world’s great strikers of the cricket ball in the likes Virat Kohli and David Miller playing second fiddle to his exploits at the crease when he smashed the highest number of sixes in a single IPL season that stood at 72. In the process he surpassed the great West Indies batter Chris Gayle who hit 59 in a season.

Sri Lankan followers for once may have to take stock of the latest batting sensation in world cricket during the Triangular after which the Indians will stay on to play two four-day matches against Sri Lanka A in Galle.

Tilak Varma (captain), Priyansh Arya, Vaibhav Sooryavanshi, Riyan Parag, Ayush Badoni, Nishant Sindhu, Harsh Dubey, Suryansh Shedge, Prabhsimran Singh (WK), Kumar Kushagra (WK), Vipraj Nigam, Yash Thakur, Yudhvir Singh, Anshul Kamboj, Arshad Khan.

Niroshan Dickwella, Avishka Fernando, Nuwanidu Fernando, Sadeera Samarawickrama, Sahan Arachchige (captain), Ahan Chamika Sahan, Wickramasinghe, Karunaratne, Wanuja Vijayakanth Viyaskanth, Mohamed Shiraz, Dulaj Samuditha, Vishen Halambage, Ravindu Fernando, Chamika Gunasekara, Garuka Sanketh, Kugadas Mathulan.