Neon Night by Browns Hotels & Resorts: A dazzling evening of industry partner networking

Under the effervescent glow of neon lights, Browns Hotels & Resorts hosted a spectacular networking event on September 6th, transforming the Excel World Colombo Convention Centre into a hub of vibrant energy and festivity. The function attracted over 500 travel agents, alongside general managers from Browns Hotels & Resorts’ properties, corporate representatives and key figures from the tourism industry. The radiant Neon theme provided the perfect backdrop for an evening of meaningful connections, animated collaboration and industry celebration.

The event commenced with guests being welcomed by the smooth sounds of jazz music, setting a refined and elegant tone for a night of exquisite cocktails and gourmet canapés, while captivating dance performances by Browns’ hotel staff added an exciting dynamic to the proceedings.

Chief Executive Officer, Eksath Wijeratne addressed the audience, stating, “Browns Hotels & Resorts continues to expand its portfolio, focusing on innovation and guest excellence. With the recent additions of Ayugiri Ayurveda Wellness Resort Sigiriya, and Ayr Castle 1922 – a charming bungalow under the Reveal the Collection boutiques – we are pleased to be setting new benchmarks in the hospitality sector.” His speech was accompanied by exclusive premieres of the new properties.

The evening additionally featured immersing activities that sparked partnerships among industry professionals. Attendees were treated to a thrilling raffle draw, along with prizes including luxurious stays at Browns Hotels & Resorts. A sumptuous buffet spread, showcasing the exceptional culinary skills of the hotel’s chefs, offered a delectable array of dishes that added an epicurean touch to the night. Entertainment was further elevated by a lively performance from The Redeemers, ensuring the event was both enjoyable and memorable for all in attendance.

The Partner Networking Night by Browns Hotels & Resorts was a lively fête of the local travel industry, showcasing the value of continued partnerships and successful collaboration.

AIA Insurance supports HelpAge Sri Lanka in transforming lives through cataract surgeries

UNESCO-Huawei Open School Initiative set to transform education in Egypt, Brazil and Thailand

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.