SL can penetrate Global Value Chain by offering relative cost advantage: economist

Fragmentation trade is expanding more rapidly than conventional final-good trade

The notion that Sri Lanka has missed the bus in gaining a firm foothold on the global manufacturing value chain is not true because there are still so many opportunities for the country to tap and increase its export-driven economic growth, Prof. Prema-chandra Athukorala said while speaking at a public lecture at the Central Bank of Sri Lanka on Oct.24, 2024.

“That’s an old-fashioned idea because if Sri Lankan manufacturers can offer a relative cost advantage on their components, parts or accessories manufactured in Sri Lanka to go into a finished product of an iconic global brand, there is still ample opportunity to do so,” he said.

“The relative cost advantage we can offer to these final product manufacturers is crucial though,” he said.

When asked about the product quality, he said,” Sri Lankan suppliers can match with the global standards of manufacturing quality as these are benchmarked and local manufacturers can integrate those standards into their processes without any difficulty.”

” It is found that, while trade in parts and components has generally grown faster than total world manufacturing trade, the degree of dependence of East Asia on this new form of international specialization is proportionately larger than in North America and Europe. International production fragmentation has certainly played a pivotal role in the continuing dynamism of the East Asian economies and increasing intra-regional economic interdependence. There is, however, no evidence to suggest that this new form of international exchange has contributed to reducing the region’s dependence on the global economy. On the contrary, growth dynamism based on vertical specialization depends inexorably on extra-regional trade in final goods, and this dependence has in fact increased over the years,” he said.

“There is clear evidence that fragmentation trade is expanding more rapidly than conventional final-good trade. The degree of dependence on this new form of international specialization is proportionately larger in East Asia than in North America and Europe. This seems to be the result of the relatively more favorable policy setting for international production, agglomeration benefits arising from early entry into this new form of specialization, and considerable inter-country wage differentials,” he noted.

“In such a context, opportunities are open for Sri Lankan manufacturers to integrate with the global value chain with their specialisations in the production of final goods, thus adding value to their own companies and enabling Sri Lanka to increase its GDP,” he noted.

Metropolitan Technologies partners with People’s Micro Commerce to support SMEs

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.