Arrogance of power

Sri Lankans are gluttons for punishment. All governments they elect with steamroller majorities invariably undermine democracy. They voted overwhelmingly for the SLFP-led United Front in 1970, the UNP in 1977, the SLFP-led UPFA in 2010, and the SLPP in 2020 only to be left with regrets. But they did so again in 2024, when they elected the JVP-led NPP with a mammoth majority, which is to be misused to amend the Constitution to extend the retirement ages of the superior court judges.

The JVP-NPP government is impervious to reason. The extension of the retirement ages of sitting judges is bound to raise concerns about a quid pro quo, severely eroding public confidence in the judiciary. Worse, if the government goes ahead with its plan, petitions against the constitutional amendment to be presented will be heard by the judges who are to benefit from the government move at issue. This will give rise to a conflict of interest and violate a core rule of natural justice that prevents bias—’no one should be a judge in his or her own case’. Therefore, the proposed constitutional amendment must be presented to the people at a referendum for their approval besides being passed by a special majority in Parliament, legal experts have argued. This argument is convincing.

Initially, the government tried to extend the retirement ages of only the judges of the Court of Appeal and the Supreme Court. Now, in a desperate bid to cover up its true intention, it is going to make a bigger mess; it is trying to extend the retirement ages of all judges, according to media reports.

Among the critics of the government’s ill-conceived move to increase judges’ retirement ages are some pro-government lawyers, including a prominent member of the NPP’s Executive Council and Leadership Council. Senior lawyer Lal Wijenayake has voiced his opposition insisting that the government action will undermine the integrity of the judiciary. He has revealed that the government plan to increase judges’ retirement ages was not presented to the NPP for approval.

The JVP-NPP government seems to have a very low opinion of the intelligence of the public. Otherwise, it would not have claimed that its move to raise the retirement ages of judges was intended to clear the backlog of cases. Judicial delays cannot be blamed on the existing retirement ages of judges. Most of all, the government has no moral right to make such a claim while refusing to fill four vacancies each in the Court of Appeal and the Supreme Court. Vacancies that remains unfilled aggravate judicial delays, which are mainly due to a multitude of interconnected causes, including the inability of the Government Analyst’s Department to issue reports expeditiously, procedural delays and outdated practices, lack of alternative dispute resolution mechanisms, shortages of judges, delays on the part of the police and the Attorney General’s Department, inadequate court infrastructure and resources, lawyers’ practices that prolong litigation, and frequent adjournments.

A referendum is something that the JVP-NPP government needs like a hole in the head at this juncture while doing everything in its power to avoid the Provincial Council elections. If it makes the mistake of rushing the proposed constitutional amendment through Parliament and extending the judges’ retirement ages without obtaining people’s approval at a referendum, its critics will question the legitimacy of the beneficiaries of the constitutional amendment, much to the detriment of the judiciary. One may recall the fate that befell the person who was sworn in as the Chief Justice following the ouster of Chief Justice Dr. Shirani Bandaranayake in 2013 through a flawed impeachment process. He lacked legitimacy and was unceremoniously removed immediately after the 2015 regime change.

It behoves the JVP-NPP government to take cognisance of the fate of previous individual-centric constitutional amendments. The 18th Amendment enabled the then President Mahinda Rajapaksa to seek a third term, and the 20th Amendment paved the way for Basil Rajapaksa’s return to Parliament while enhancing the executive powers of the then President Gotabaya Rajapaksa. In 2015, Mahinda failed to secure a third term, and in 2022, Basil, Gotabaya and Mahinda had to head for the hills with angry mobs in close pursuit. The two constitutional amendments have been relegated to the dustbin of history, and their architects, beneficiaries and backers are struggling to remain politically relevant. Will the JVP/NPP leaders, blinded by the arrogance of power, make the same mistake?

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.