SLIM elects new leadership for 2024-2025

The Sri Lanka Institute of Marketing (SLIM) elected its Council of Management and Executive Committee for the 2024/2025 term at the 54th Annual General Meeting, held on March 27, at the Galadari Hotel, Colombo, saw the election of a distinguished group of marketing professionals who will guide SLIM’s strategic direction over the coming year. The newly elected Council of Management comprises of: Gayan Perera – President, Prof. Dewasiri N. Jayantha – Vice President – Education & Research, Dr. Dilhan Sampath Jayatilleke – Vice President – Events & Sustainability, Enoch Perera – Honorary Secretary, Manthika Ranasinghe – Honorary Treasurer, Asanka Perera – Honorary Assistant Secretary: The Executive Committee for 2024-2025 includes Nuwan Thilakawardhana, Rajiv David, Maduranga Weeratunga, Kaushala Amarasekara, Channa Jayasinghe, Dr. Muditha Hewawanitunga, Gayan Wijethilaka, Asanka Udayakumara, Anuk De Silva and Nirmala Premarathna.

Commenting on the way forward, Gayan Perera, President of SLIM, outlined his vision for the year ahead: “We are honoured to be entrusted with leading SLIM during this critical time. Our focus for 2024 is on ‘The WAY FORWARD,’ a strategic roadmap that prioritizes educational excellence and equips marketers with the skills they need to navigate the ever-evolving business landscape. We will continue to foster a vibrant learning environment while offering industry-relevant programs that cater to the dynamic needs of the modern marketer and industry.”

Prof. Dewasiri N. Jayantha, SLIM’s Vice President – Education & Research, emphasized the institute’s commitment to community development and its role in driving economic prosperity. “We believe that a strong marketing community is essential for Sri Lanka’s long-term success. We will actively engage with businesses and academic institutions to promote knowledge sharing and collaboration,” Prof. Jayantha said. SLIM CEO, Sanath Senanayake said: “The marketing landscape is undergoing a rapid transformation, with digital technologies playing an increasingly crucial role. We will continue to invest in online learning platforms and develop innovative programs that address the ever-evolving digital marketing landscape,” Senanayake added.

CSE partners with SLIM to promote capital market education among students

Dentsu’s Isobar Sri Lanka: Gaming their way to the top at the SLIM Digis 2.3 for the second consecutive year

SLIM collaborates with John Keells consumer food sector to enhance sales managers’ skills

Ceylinco Life only insurer among Sri Lanka’s 10 ‘Most Admired’ companies

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.