HNB celebrates 135-year legacy of partnerships and progress with commemorative stamp launch

Consolidating its legacy as a cornerstone of the nation’s banking system, Sri Lanka’s premier private sector bank HNB PLC, celebrated its 135th year of supporting customers and businesses to achieve their financial goals with the release of a commemorative stamp.

Commenting on the historic occasion HNB’s Managing Director / Chief Executive Officer Jonathan Alles said, “Since our inception, HNB has recognized that our true strength lies not only in our financial prowess but also in the people we serve – from budding savers to thriving SMEs. Initiatives like ‘Gami Pubuduwa’ exemplify our commitment to embedding ourselves within communities, fostering relationships based on continuous progress and shared prosperity. Throughout, HNB has served as a beacon of hope, guiding micro-businesses to international success, and showcasing the resolute spirit of Sri Lankan entrepreneurship. Together, we eagerly anticipate the journey ahead, as we draw inspiration from our past achievements and embrace the opportunities of tomorrow.”

HNB has served as a partner in progress to generations of Sri Lankans, standing out as a symbol of resilience and innovation. The bank, and the brand have continued to evolve and adapt to an increasingly volatile, fast-paced economic landscape. As the nation’s largest private Commercial bank, HNB has emerged as a pillar of stability and a driver of change.

Over the past decade, the bank underwent an ambitious transformation, leveraging technology and digitalisation to drive sweeping upgrades to its infrastructure with a view to enable greater speed, agility, and accuracy across its back-end systems. This in turn resulted in radical improvements in service delivery and customer experience. Particularly in the aftermath of the COVID pandemic, HNB’s unmatched strengths in digital banking also helped drive the nation’s digital adoption to new heights.

Amidst these trials, HNB focused on providing uninterrupted service, ensuring stability for its customers leveraging streamlined administrative systems, redesigned product portfolios, to establish a thriving digital payment ecosystem accessible to all Sri Lankans.

The journey of brand HNB is a testament to its ability to adapt, innovate, and grow in the face of adversity. The bank’s commitment to providing exceptional customer experiences, coupled with its focus on sustainability and technological innovation, has cemented its position as a trusted and forward-thinking financial institution in Sri Lanka. (HNB)

IMF program is exhibiting promising signs of efficacy – IMF Mission Chief for Sri Lanka

Expanding Ed-tech through partnerships, collaborations, and AI to improve quality education: Insights for Sri Lanka

Declaration of attractive dividends by banking sector counters rejuvenates bourse

HNB unveils the future of rapid customer onboarding in partnership with Lime by LinearSix

HNB renews partnership with Prime Group for exclusive home loans

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.