Metropolitan and People’s  Micro Commerce partner to boost SME business

Standing from left: Metropolitan Technologies Senior Manager – Brand Management and Marketing Saleem Muthaliph, Retail and SME Head Shamaz Hossen, Vice President – Retail Sector Praveen Samarakone, Director/CEO Ali Asgar Roshanali, People’s Micro Commerce Director/Chairman Pradeep Amirthanayagam, Executive Supervisory Officer Randhil Siriwardena, General Manager Wasantha Gunawardhana, Credit Head Sanjaya Sumedha Herath, and Legal Head Malsha Mihirani

Metropolitan Technologies Ltd. has entered into a strategic partnership with People’s Micro Commerce Ltd. to support small and medium enterprises (SMEs).

This collaboration aims to offer microcredit facilities for essential workplace solutions, alleviating financial burdens on startups and SMEs by providing funding for crucial overheads and equipment expenses at a concessionary rate, with funds accessible within 36 hours. The initiative is poised to significantly enhance SME and startup business activities in the region.

People’s Micro Commerce Director and Chairman Michael Pradeep Amirthanayagam said: “We will be offering SME customers a very concessionary rate for purchasing their workplace solutions through Metropolitan.”

The SME sector in Sri Lanka is one of the country’s fastest-growing segments, accounting for over 50% of employment. Despite the increasing demand for advanced technology products and services, limited funding often hinders growth. This partnership will enable SMEs to acquire a wide range of products from Metropolitan’s extensive lineup, including computing, printing, air conditioning, standby power generators, CCTV systems, point of sale units, plotters, copiers, and digital cameras.

Metropolitan Technologies Director and CEO Ali Asgar Roshanali said: “Metropolitan is the only specialist workplace solutions company in Sri Lanka providing a full range of products from IT to printing to power and energy solutions. We are happy to extend our range of products to the SME sector, which can benefit from this partnership with People’s Micro -Commerce Ltd, the educational sector needs to be in step with the technological advancements shaping the world. Nowadays, devices are essential for education, yet there is an affordability gap in Sri Lanka. This type of program will help the masses in actually reaching their futuristic tomorrow.”

This special funding for SMEs and startups is available throughout Sri Lanka at M Centre branches and is supported by 30 People’s Micro Commerce offices countrywide. All Metropolitan products come with a warranty and an after-sales service promise, backed by Metropolitan’s over 66 years of industry trust. Metropolitan Technologies is a subsidiary of Metropolitan Holdings, a diversified conglomerate offering sophisticated and straightforward engineering, communications, IT, and imaging solutions.