‘Dialog Enterprise Partners with UTECH Technologies for Industry 4.0 Transformation’.

Dialog Enterprise, the corporate ICT solutions arm of Dialog Axiata PLC., proudly announces the latest addition to its portfolio of industry-leading and innovative automation solutions together with, UTECH solutions.

Through the partnership, Dialog Enterprise aims to leverage its considerable experience in working with diverse industries and multiple use cases to develop innovative and affordable technology solutions helping businesses find efficiencies and productivity enhancements required to be competitive with the demands of a changing business environment.

Focusing on facilitating the transition to Industry 4.0 for enterprises, this collaboration therefore enables tailored IIoT solutions for integrating smart devices, data analytics and automation systems to optimize operations and boost efficiency.

“We are excited at the multitude of prospects this partnership presents us with,” said Riyad Ismail, Managing Director/CEO, of UTECH reflecting on its coalition with Dialog Enterprise. “Every business enterprise has its unique challenges in the digital transformation journey. At UTECH, we specialize in identifying the specific requirements, and in turn, invest in cutting edge research and development to innovate solutions that solve specific problems at an affordable cost to all industries,” he described further.

Set to empower businesses to maintain their competitive edge through technology, the proposed solution stack includes IIoT telematic gateways designed for remote monitoring and control of plant and machinery equipment. These gateways offer seamless integration with various applications, forming a comprehensive technological stack to oversee entire industrial manufacturing processes. This ensures optimal operational efficiency, planned cost adherence, and enhanced quality, thereby boosting productivity across production lines for both machines and human workers.

“We are cognizant of the need for rapid digitization and the need to be a leading partner in our customers’ transformation process. We are in a unique position to bring together technologies such as 5G, AI, IOT on a single platform said Navin Pieris, Group Chief Officer of Dialog Enterprise. “With our industry experience and our strategic partnerships from across the globe, we are able to assist large as well as SMEs alike with technological solutions catered to their niche in the trade” he explained further.

Ceylinco Life treats Family Savari winners to a day of unbridled fun at Pearl Bay

DTH Travel Maldives seals title of “Indian Ocean’s Leading DMC”

Empowering Your Digital Fortress: Where Cybersecurity meets Unrivaled Protection for Every Digital Realm

Dialog Enterprise launches stronger customer cloud propositions with VMware by Broadcom

Dialog Enterprise partners with H One to launch ‘Operator Connect’ for Microsoft Teams

Dialog Enterprise recognised as the Emerging Partner of CrowdStrike in Sri Lanka

Dialog Enterprise Cloud cecomes VMware Sovereign Cloud provider in South Asia

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.