Sri Lanka’s new govt to begin drafting new constitution upon election

ECONOMYNEXT — Sri Lanka will begin the process of drafting a new constitution once a new government has been elected, cabinet spokesman and minister Vijitha Herath said.

Speaking to reporters at the first ever cabinet press briefing of President Anura Kumara Dissanayake’s three-member cabinet on Tuesday October 01, Herath said the draft constitution will be presented to the public for a referendum.

“It was a presidential election that was held recently. A president was elected. A parliamentary election has been called to elect a government. Regarding a solution to the ethnic issue, our manifesto clearly states that a new constitution will be drafted and presented before the people of the country for their approval. We will begin that process once the new government has been formed,” he said.

On the campaign trail, Dissanayake as presidential candidate of the National People’s Power (NPP) said an NPP government will hold a referendum on a new constitution, hold the delayed provincial council and local government polls within a year, and appoint a commission to investigate discrimination.

Speaking at a rally in Jaffna on September 05, Dissanayake said an NPP administration will draft a new constitution on the premise of equality, democracy and participatory governance as one country, picking up where the 2015-2019 administration left off.

“A lot of southern politicians try to make deals with the people of north. They say ‘Vote for us; we’ll give you the 13th amendment or 13 or land powers’. How long have they been doing this? I’m not here for that. If I came to make a deal with you, you might say 13 is not enough, give us plus. My first intention is to build a government that has won the confidence of both the north and the south,” he said.

“Governments in our country were formed against the ‘other’. Governments in the south were formed against the north. Sinhala governments were formed against Tamil people. My first objective is to change this politics of opposition to the other,” he added.

Dissanayake said that there has been a need for a new constitution in Sri Lanka for a long time.

“In 2000 a new constitution was drafted. Ranil Wickremesinghe and co set fire to it in parliament and put an end to that. There was conversation again about the constitution between 2015 and 2019, but there was no conclusion,” he said.

The NPP leader said the NPP plans to “rapidly conclude the process that began in 2015-2019” and draft a new constitution based on equality and democracy and where everyone can participate in governance as one country. The draft constitution will seek to “devolve power politically and administratively to every local government body, district and province and guarantee the political participation of every ethnicity”. (Colombo/Oct01/2024)