Opposition claims Sri Lanka ruling party wants early parliamentary polls to prevent wipe-out

ECONOMYNEXT — The ruling Sri Lanka Podujana Peramuan (SLPP) wants parliamentary elections first to prevent a wipe-out, main opposition Samagi Jana Balawegaya (SJB) MP Mujibur Rahuman said.

The MP claimed that the SLPP has strategically considered the possibility that President Ranil Wickremesinghe will not win the presidential election scheduled for this year, which is why they are in a hurry to hold the parliamentary polls before.

“But if it’s held after the presidential election, they will be wiped out. They have understood this politically. That’s why they want the parliamentary elections first, so they can get at least 25 seats,” Rahuman said speaking to reporters.

However, government spokesmen continue to be emphatic that a presidential election will be held first. Wickremesinghe himself had said on several occasions, as recently as this week, that parliamentary elections will be held after.

Tourism and Sports Minister Harin Fernando told reporters that Wickremesinghe would definitely contest the election, in response to some speculation that the president may opt to sit out.

“I think President Wickremesinghewill himself reveal his plans next week or one of these days,” said Fernando.

“He will definitely contest. I said he would for sure. Not only will he contest, he will also win,” he added.

“President Wickremesinghe will definitely win the election,” he said, adding that the president has provided much relief and that the economy continues to recover having fallen to its lowest point.

Sri Lanka’s upcoming presidential election is expected to be held between September 17 and October 17. President Wickremesinghe has yet to formally announce his candidacy though he is widely expected to seek a mandate for his ongoing International Monetary Fund (IMF)-backed economic reforms.

Opposition leader Sajith Premadasa and leader of the leftist alliance National People’s Power (NPP) are the two other top contenders, with Dissanayake consistently leading at least one opinion poll.

The SLPP has not yet made an official announcement on whether they will back Wickremesinghe or field their own candidate. Businessman Dhammika Perera’s name has also been linked to the SLPP in connection with the presidential poll. (Colombo/May27/2024)