Sri Lanka participates in 2024 ‘Impact Harvest Forum’

Sri Lanka participated in the 2024 ‘Impact Harvest Forum’ on the theme, ‘Investing in Inclusive Businesses’ convened by the United Nations Economic Commission for Asia and the Pacific (ESCAP) and the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation at the United Nations Conference Centre in Bangkok, from 23-24 May.

Sri Lanka’s Cabinet of Ministers recently adopted a National Strategy to Promote Inclusive and Sustainable Businesses to achieve the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) in Sri Lanka. Developed under the leadership of the Sustainable Development Council with technical support from ESCAP, the strategy provides for a coherent set of actions to promote the development of Inclusive and Sustainable Businesses through legal and regulatory frameworks, capacity development for integration into local and global supply chains, local and global recognition, partnerships, impact measurement, reporting and improved access to finance.

The 2024 ‘Impact Harvest Forum’ aims to identify investment opportunities and financing mechanisms to support the growth and impact of inclusive businesses, ultimately fostering sustainable development and economic inclusion in the region. Towards this objective, the Forum will explore opportunities for investing in inclusive businesses in agriculture and food systems, identify concrete actions to promote and facilitate investments in inclusive businesses and facilitate networking and explore partnerships among investors, governments agencies, development partners and firms.

Sri Lanka’s delegation to the 2024 Impact Harvest Forum consists of Ms. Achala Samaradiwakara, Co-founder-Good Market, Ms. Randhula de Silva – Founder CEO, GOOD LIFE X, Buwanekabahu Perera – Secretary General and CEO of the Ceylon Chamber of Commerce, Chaminda Pathiraja – Additional Secretary, Ministry of Industries and J.D Hemakumara Silva – Director (Planning) , Industrial Development Board.

Related Topics:Impact Harvest ForumSri Lanka participates in 2024 ‘Impact Harvest Forum’

SL’s debt restructuring issues disrupt Kandy city’s JICA-funded sanitation project

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.