Lanka IOC rings CSE market opening bell to usher in Silver Jubilee year

From left: Sandeep Gupta, Vice President – Engineering, Lanka IOC PLC (LIOC); Singhal Avinash, Senior Vice President – Finance, LIOC; Rajeeva Bandaranaike, CEO, Colombo Stock Exchange (CSE); Raghu Krishnamoorthy, Managing Director, LIOC; Jitendra Sharma, Senior Vice President – Retail Sales, LIOC; Sunil Kanta Maharana, Vice President – Operations & Bunker, LIOC; K.A.N Prabhu, Vice President – Finance, LIOC; Nilupa Perera, Chief Regulatory Officer (CRO), CSE

Lanka IOC PLC marked the commencement of its 25th year of operations in Sri Lanka with a market opening ceremony on the Colombo Stock Exchange (CSE) trading floor earlier this week, highlighted by the ringing of the Market Opening Bell.

The event celebrated the company’s enduring contribution to Sri Lanka’s energy sector and its role in supporting the nation’s economic growth and development as it approaches a quarter century of providing its services.

Established in 2002 as the Sri Lankan subsidiary of Indian Oil Corporation Limited, Lanka IOC has grown to become a leading player in Sri Lanka’s downstream petroleum industry with position on the S&P Sri Lanka 20 index. Over the past 24 years, the company has played a significant role in ensuring energy security for the country through its nationwide retail fuel network, lubricant business, bunkering operations, and storage infrastructure.

Today, Lanka IOC operates an extensive network of fuel stations across the island and manages strategic petroleum storage facilities, while continuing to invest in operational excellence, service innovation, and sustainable business practices. The company has consistently contributed to the nation’s energy security and demonstrated resilience, reliability, and commitment as well as contributing to the advancement of Sri Lanka’s energy sector through long-term investments and partnerships.

The ceremony’s keynote speaker, K. Raghu, Managing Director of Lanka IOC PLC, remarked “As Sri Lanka’s energy landscape continues to evolve, we remain committed to driving sustainable growth, delivering operational excellence, and contributing meaningfully to the country’s economic and social development providing energy security. As LIOC looks toward the future, the company remains focused on supporting Sri Lanka’s transition towards a more sustainable energy future while continuing to uphold the highest standards of business excellence and stakeholder trust.”

Addressing the gathering, Rajeeva Bandaranaike, Chief Executive Officer of the Colombo Stock Exchange, congratulated Lanka IOC on the milestone, remarking “On behalf of the Colombo Stock Exchange, I congratulate Lanka IOC PLC on its 24th anniversary and the commencement of its Silver Jubilee Year. This milestone reflects the company’s strong leadership, resilience, and lasting contribution to Sri Lanka’s energy sector. We wish the team continued success in the years ahead.”

The commemorative bell-ringing ceremony brought together representatives from Lanka IOC PLC and CSE to celebrate a milestone that underscores the company’s longstanding presence and contribution to Sri Lanka’s economic and industrial landscape.