Fuel consumers’ serious concerns

The Ceylon Petroleum Corporation (CPC) has reduced the prices of petrol 92 Octane and auto diesel marginally by Rs. 20 per litre and Rs. 25 per litre, respectively, though global oil prices are hovering near USD 70 (WTI) to USD 73 (Brent) per barrel almost at the pre-Iran war level. Regular petrol and auto diesel are now priced at Rs. 414 per litre and Rs 382 per litre, respectively. Sri Lanka’s oil pricing follows a rockets-and-feathers pattern rather than reflecting actual costs. The JVP-NPP government is accused of behaving like some Pettah wholesalers notorious for price gouging.

Former Minister of Power and Energy Champika Ranawaka has urged the government to make public the fuel pricing formula and explain how fuel prices are worked out. Other Opposition politicians ought to join Ranawaka in pressuring the government to ensure transparency in the fuel pricing process. Ranawaka has said that according to his calculations, petrol and diesel now cost the government Rs. 220 per litre and Rs. 235-240 per litre, respectively. He has accused the government of maintaining very high mark-ups and exploiting the public.

Sticky petroleum prices are not the only problem troubling fuel consumers. Fuel quality issues also cause serious concerns to them. They wonder whether fuel is clean and stable and whether they get their money’s worth at the pump. Most of them complain of a drop in fuel efficiency, rough idling, jerking and poor acceleration. Their concerns cannot be dismissed as baseless. There have been numerous instances of fuel contamination due to factors such as water ingress, sediment in underground tanks, improper handling at filling stations and even adulteration of fuel. In a country where shiploads of substandard coal have been imported with impunity, and costly diesel is burnt to meet a generation shortfall at the coal-fired power plant, with additional costs being passed on to the public, anything is possible. Most of all, the CPC has a history of selling low-quality fuel.

One may recall that a special audit, conducted by the Auditor General’s Department, on the procurement of petroleum products by the CPC from 01 June 2011 to 30 June 2012, revealed that gasoline 90 Octane had been purchased at the 92 Octane price, without bargaining or negotiating with suppliers at the bid evaluation stage of the procurement process, to obtain a recommendation on the premium of that product; low quality gasoline (lower than 90 Octane) produced at the refinery of the CPC had been mixed with imported gasoline 92 Octane and that blended product had been distributed all over the country during 2011. The then Petroleum Minister Susil Premjayantha claimed that petrol may have been mixed with rainwater. But the country was experiencing a drought at that time! The present-day ministers also have earned notoriety for making such absurd claims and insulting the intelligence of the public.

In 2019, the National Movement for Consumer Rights Protection alleged that the fuel sold as petrol 92 Octane actually had an octane rating of about 90.5. Subsequent laboratory analyses supported that claim. Last week, we quoted SJB trade unionist and former CPC employee, Palitha Ananda, as having claimed that the CPC refinery was unable to produce petrol with 92 Octane rating by using American crude WTI, and an experiment to produce petrol 92 Octane by using UAE’s Murban crude and WTI had been in vain.

Fuel consumers are in a dilemma. They cannot rely on forecourt brands; it is not advisable to assume that one brand is inherently superior, for fuel is said to pass through the same common-user storage and quality-control system. Petroleum sector experts inform us that fuel is not meaningfully traceable by brand at the pump. It is not possible for ordinary people to have fuel tested, as is obvious, and they have to rely solely on quality assurances given by the CPC, which has tarnished its reputation. It is like asking a suspect to investigate himself.

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.