Minister pledges to build Australia-like Sri Lanka

Industry and Entrepreneurship Development Minister Sunil Handunneththi has pledged to transform Sri Lanka into a country offering freedom, equality before the law and opportunities, similar to those available in Australia.

Addressing the Sri Lankan Entrepreneurs’ Night 2026 entrepreneur and investor conference in Melbourne, Handunneththi said the government was working to create a new economic environment that would provide greater opportunities for the citizens while attracting investors to Sri Lanka.

The conference, organised by the Australia Sri Lanka Business Forum on August 15, brought together more than 350 participants, including Australian and Sri Lankan entrepreneurs, investors, business leaders and politicians.

Handunneththi said the government had been working over the past two years to establish a more investor-friendly, transparent and trustworthy economic environment, supported by measures aimed at strengthening good governance and controlling corruption.

He said Sri Lanka was also focusing on improving infrastructure to support economic growth and investment, including expanding port access, developing the highway network and modernising the country’s transport sector through initiatives such as electric rail and metro bus systems. Handunneththi also highlighted large-scale renewable energy projects aimed at providing the businesses with energy at competitive prices, saying improved infrastructure and reliable energy supplies were essential for attracting investment.

He invited the Australian investors and entrepreneurs to participate in Sri Lanka’s economic transformation, stressing that investment opportunities were available across sectors and at different scales.

According to Handunneththi, particular attention would be given to strengthening supply chains and developing the tourism sector as part of efforts to expand economic activity and create new opportunities. The event was chaired by Australia Sri Lanka Business Forum Chairman Mano Amunugama and its Executive Committee.

Australian Federal Parliamentarian Cassandra Fernando, Sri Lankan Consul General in Melbourne Pradeepa Seram, Sri Lanka Export Development Board Chairman Mangala Wijesinghe and Board of Investment of Sri Lanka Director General Dr. Sulakshana Jayawardena were among those present.

NPP Australia organiser Pubudu Samaraweera, Australian state and territory parliamentarians and leading business representatives from both countries also attended the conference, which focused on strengthening trade, investment and economic relations between Sri Lanka and Australia.