What a lineup for New Year’s Eve…

Next Wednesday (25th) we celebrate Christmas, and a week later…yes, another year has ended and the dawning of a new one (January 1st).

Once the Christmas celebrations are over, 31st night revellers will all be looking forward to stepping out…to usher in 2025.

This year there’s plenty of activity, connected with New Year’s Eve, but, I guess, those who are in the mood to celebrate would like to do it differently.

The talk of the town, at the moment, is the James Bond Gala Dinner Dance at the Cinnamon Lakeside Hotel, in Colombo. And dance enthusiasts do have plenty of good reasons to be discussing this special night.

For a 31st night event to be a huge success, two important aspects have to be look at – the music and, of course, the cuisine – and there is no doubt that Cinnamon Lakeside has got it all…and well planned out, too.

The Hotel has got a superb lineup of top artistes to help guests say a nostalgic ‘bye’ to 2024 and usher in 2025 with gaiety.

In the spotlight will be Judy De Silva, Monique (of Gypsies fame), Falan Andrea, Sohan, Geoffrey Fernando (Purple Rain fame) and J-Pal, along with Sohan & The X-Periments and the band AROH.

Doing the needful as compere will be Kumar De Silva. And, for the record, Kumar celebrates his birthday on Friday, December 20th.

I’m told that the entertainers have planned out a repertoire that would keep the guests dancing, and having fun, all night long.

In addition to the top class entertainment, guests would have the opportunity to check out the longest 31st night buffet in the city…with variety plus, plus!

With all his experience in the hotel scene in the UK, Nazoomi Azhar, the new General Manager at Cinnamon Lakeside, is working on making the James Bond Gala Dinner Dance the number one 31st night dance party, in the scene here…with excitement and memories galore!

Sohan, too, indicated that it’s going to be the dance of the year.

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.