Cheaper credit expected to drive Sri Lanka’s business landscape in 2026

The opening weeks of 2026 are offering a glimmer of cautious hope for the business community weary from years of economic turbulence and steep financing costs. The Central Bank’s latest weekly economic indicators signal more than just macroeconomic stability. They point to early signs of a long-awaited trend; a measurable dip in borrowing costs.

“If sustained, this shift could transform steady growth into a robust, investment-led expansion,” a senior economist told The Island Financial Review.

The benchmark Average Weighted Prime Lending Rate (AWPR) declined by 21 basis points to 8.98% for the week ending 16 January, according to the Central Bank.

“For entrepreneurs and CEOs, this is not just another statistic. It could mean the difference between postponing an expansion and hiring new staff. Across boardrooms, the hope is that this marks the start of a sustained downward trend that holds through 2026,” he said.

When asked about the instances where Treasury Bills are not fully subscribed by the investors, he replied,”  Treasury Bill yields remained broadly stable, with only minimal movement across 91-day, 182-day, and 364-day tenors. Strong demand was clear, with the latest T-Bill auction oversubscribed by about 3.5 times. This sovereign-level stability creates room for the gradual easing of commercial lending rates, allowing the Central Bank to nurture a more growth-supportive monetary policy.”

Replying to a question on how he views the inflation numbers in this context, he said, “The year-on-year increase in the National Consumer Price Index stood at a manageable 2.4% in November, with core inflation at 2.2%. Such an environment should allow interest rates to fall without sparking a price spiral. For businesses, it means the real cost of borrowing adjusted for inflation, and it is becoming more favourable for them. While consumers still face weekly price shifts in vegetables and fish, the broader disinflation trend gives policymakers leeway to keep credit affordable.”

Referring to the growth trajectory, he mentioned, “With GDP growth provisionally at 5.4% in the third quarter of 2025 and Purchasing Managers’ Indices signalling expansion in both manufacturing and services, the economy is in a growth phase. However, to accelerate this momentum businesses need capital at lower cost to modernise machinery, boost export capacity, and spur innovation. Affordable credit is, therefore, not merely helpful, it is essential to shift growth into a higher gear.”

In conclusion , he said,” The coming months will be watched closely, because for Sri Lankan businesses, a sustained decline in borrowing costs isn’t just an indicator; it’s the foundation for growth. There’s hope that this easing in the cost of money will prevail through most of the year.”

Redefining Industry Standards: Home Lands Group Emerges as Sri Lanka’s Premier Force in Lifestyle and Developer Leadership

Mercantile Investments expands to 90 branches, backed by strong growth

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.