Jetwing Hotels wins 24 Tripadvisor Travellers’ Choice Awards

Jetwing Hotels receives highest number of honours in Sri Lanka at 2026 Travellers’ Choice Awards

Jetwing Hotels announced that 24 of their hotels have been recognised by TripAdvisor as 2026 Travellers’ Choice award winners, garnering the highest number of honours for a hotel group in Sri Lanka.

Tripadvisor’s Travelers’ Choice Award winners are among the top 10 percent of listings around the world on Tripadvisor. As the world’s largest travel guidance platform, Tripadvisor has unparalleled authority with the travellers and diners. This award is based on genuine feedback from anyone in the community who has visited and left an authentic, first-hand review on Tripadvisor over a 12-month period, making it a valuable and trustworthy designation of travellers’ favourites.

Jetwing Ayurveda Pavilions, Jetwing Beach, Jetwing Blue, Jetwing Colombo Seven, Jetwing Jaffna, Jetwing Kaduruketha, Jetwing Kandy Gallery, Jetwing Lagoon Wellness, Jetwing Lake, Jetwing Lighthouse, Jetwing Jungle Lodge, Jetwing Sea, Jetwing St. Andrew’s, Jetwing Surf & Safari, Jetwing Vil Uyana, Jetwing Yala, Jetwing Saman Villas, Jetwing Kurulubedda, Jetwing Thalahena Villa, Jetwing Warwick Gardens, Jetwing Broomfield Bungalow, Jetwing Oatlands Bungalow, Xavier’s Cottage, have all been recognised for their excellent service by TripAdvisor travellers.

In addition, Mermaid Hotel and Club received the coveted Travellers’ Choice Best of the Best award, placing it in the top one percent of listings globally. This distinction highlights the highest-rated destinations, accommodations and experiences as reviewed by the Tripadvisor community. This award is based on genuine feedback from anyone in the community who has visited and left an authentic, first-hand review on Tripadvisor over a 12-month period, making it a valuable and trustworthy designation of travellers’ favourites.

Jetwing Hotels Managing Director Dmitri Cooray stated, “This recognition reflects our unwavering focus on delivering heartfelt service and authentic Sri Lankan hospitality. Guest feedback plays a vital role in inspiring our teams and guiding our continuous improvement.”

“Congratulations to Jetwing Hotels on its recognition in Tripadvisor’s Travelers’ Choice Awards for 2026,” said Tripadvisor Chief Marketing Officer Matt Dacey.