AIA Sri Lanka unveils iSMART+, setting new standards in distribution quality and customer experience

AIA Insurance Lanka recently launched iSMART+, a groundbreaking digital platform designed to transform the way its distribution force works and engages with customers. Developed under the company’s flagship transformation initiative, AIA NOVA, iSMART+ is set to redefine productivity, efficiency, and customer experience across the distribution channel.

As part of AIA’s continued commitment to innovation, iSMART+ brings together multiple tools and systems into a single, seamless platform with the objective of empowering users with simplified access, real-time insights, and enhanced visibility of their business performance. Through a unified single sign-on experience, iSMART+ eliminates the need to navigate across multiple platforms, enabling users to access all their essential applications effortlessly. This streamlined integration allows AIA’s sales force to focus more on what truly matters – serving customers and driving impactful outcomes.

Another key feature of iSMART+ is its ability to provide a comprehensive, real-time view of activities and performance. From lead management and activity tracking to performance monitoring, all key information is consolidated into one intuitive interface, giving users a complete overview of their business at a glance. This supports faster, more informed decision-making and helps users identify the next best actions to effectively engage with customers.

The platform also introduces a powerful 360-degree customer view, enabling users to better understand and anticipate customer needs. By offering insights into customer journeys and key milestones, iSMART+ enhances the ability to deliver personalised, timely and meaningful interactions that would ultimately elevate overall customer experience.

iSMART+ reflects AIA’s broader vision under AIA NOVA to enhance operational efficiency and create seamless experiences for agency distribution channel.

ComBank’s ‘Max Loyalty Rewards’ soars to new heights with airline miles option

Asia’s richest man Ambani announces what could be India’s biggest share sale

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.