HNB General Insurance and Commercial Bank enter strategic bancassurance partnership

HNB General Insurance (HNBGI) recently entered into a bancassurance partnership with Commercial Bank of Ceylon PLC, one of Sri Lanka’s largest and most reputed private banks. This strategic partnership marks a milestone in their shared mission to provide innovative, customer-centric insurance solutions.

The partnership was formalized by Sanath Manatunge, Managing Director / Chief Executive Officer of Commercial Bank, and Sithumina Jayasundara, CEO of HNB General Insurance, during a ceremonial signing. This strategic partnership alliance leverages the strengths of both institutions to deliver unparalleled convenience and tailored insurance options for their customers.

Through this collaboration, Commercial Bank’s extensive customer base of over 3.5 million, served through Over 270 branches nationwide, will gain access to HNB General Insurance’s innovative portfolio of general insurance products. These carefully curated offerings are designed to deliver comprehensive coverage, promoting greater inclusivity and peace of mind for Sri Lankans.

Commenting on the collaboration, Sithumina Jayasundara, CEO of HNB General Insurance, stated, “Joining forces with Commercial Bank is a significant milestone for HNBGI. This partnership not only enhances our footprint across Sri Lanka but also reaffirms our dedication to delivering best-in-class insurance solutions to meet the diverse needs of Sri Lankans.”

“This partnership reflects Commercial Bank’s commitment to enriching the financial wellbeing of our customers by offering them innovative and tailored solutions. Collaborating with HNB General Insurance allows us to deliver added value and convenience to our clients, aligning with our mission to empower communities across Sri Lanka,” said Sanath Manatunge, Managing Director/ Chief Executive Officer, Commercial Bank of Ceylon.

This collaboration reinforces both organizations’ commitment to advancing inclusivity in Sri Lanka while prioritizing customer convenience and satisfaction. HNB General Insurance, as part of the HNB Assurance PLC which in turn is part of the reputed HNB Group and Commercial Bank, widely recognized for their excellence in banking, bring together their expertise to redefine convenience and security, setting a new benchmark for service excellence for customers of both institutions.

A quarter century of progress: Raffles’ story of resilience and innovation

Launching of Curtin University Colombo, a landmark in Australia-SL educational ties

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.