CPA Australia delegation strengthens ties in Sri Lanka and fosters collaboration to nurture talent

A high-level delegation from CPA Australia, including board members and representatives from international markets, recently concluded a successful visit to Sri Lanka. The delegation’s primary focus was on establishing strong relationships with local governments, professional bodies, universities, and banking institutions.

“We’re excited to be expanding our presence in Sri Lanka,” said Professor Dale Pinto (FCPA), Global President and Chair of the Board at CPA Australia. “Since the launch of our local liaison office in June 2023, we’ve seen our membership flourish to nearly 500. Many of these members are now holding pivotal roles across diverse industries, showcasing the strength and influence of CPA Australia in the region.”

The delegation also recognised long-standing members during a special ceremony, acknowledging their achievements over the past 10 or 20 years.

“This dedication to the profession truly inspires us,” remarked Professor Pinto. “Sri Lanka is home to a wealth of experienced professionals and promising young talent pursuing careers in accounting and finance. This vibrant talent pool is a major driving force behind our strengthened commitment to the region.”

The ceremony also celebrated several prominent Sri Lankan companies officially recognised as CPA Australia’s employer partners (REP), demonstrating CPA Australia’s brand building efforts since the official launch of the brand in Sri Lanka in July 2023.

“We are immensely grateful for the support of prominent employers partnering with CPA Australia to advance the accounting and finance profession in Sri Lanka,” said Professor Pinto. “Their collaboration opens up exceptional opportunities for our members, enabling them to thrive and succeed in their careers on a global scale.”

The CPA Australia delegation met with President Ranil Wickremesinghe and engaged in productive discussions with local government officials, regulatory bodies, employers, and educational and banking institutions.

“We are deeply honoured to have forged these connections,” Professor Pinto added. “Signing MoUs with esteemed organisations such as the CFA Society Sri Lanka and the University of Sri Jayewardenepura (USJ) enables us to collaborate effectively and empower young talent with the latest accounting and finance knowledge and skills. This collaboration will significantly contribute to Sri Lanka’s sustainable economic growth.”

Dr. Sunethra Nugawela earns international kudos for her work in Office Management field in Sri Lanka

43 hectares of land in Trincomalee Port allocated for 20MW solar power project

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.