Link Natural links with GDSA for Dentistree Congress and Platinum Jubilee

Link Natural, Sri Lanka’s leading manufacturer of herbal healthcare and personal care products, continued to build on its strong relationships with key stakeholders by becoming the Main Sponsor at the first-ever ‘Dentistree Congress 2024’ and the Platinum Jubilee (70th Anniversary) celebration of the Government Dental Surgeons’ Association (GDSA) held at the Monarch Imperial recently.

Hosted by ‘Dentistree’, the academic arm of GDSA, ‘Dentistree Congress’ and International Dental Trade Exhibition included insightful sessions conducted by an expert panel of speakers. The Dental Trade Exhibition featured over 40 trade stalls showcasing dental companies, banks and other organizations. It was a resounding success with over 300 registrations for the dental congress and more than 700 participants overall. The event also featured two symposiums on the topics of “Medical Problems in Dental Practice” and “Full Mouth Rehabilitation”.

GDSA is an organization committed to advancing the well-being of dental professionals and promoting the oral health of the nation. Sharing his thoughts on the partnership, Head of Corporate Projects of Link Natural, Samagi Rajapakse stated, “Link Natural has always been committed to enhancing health and wellness. We are honoured to support an official body whose advocacy has been influential in developing the nation’s oral health, ensuring the highest standard of care for the public.”

Link Natural is a leading manufacturer in the local market with an expanding portfolio of herbal healthcare and personal care products. Having commenced operations in 1982 with the manufacturing of spice essential oils for the export market, Link Natural has delivered high quality products for over 40 years. Link Natural has always been a forerunner in strengthening the nation’s oral care with their key oral care brand, Link Sudantha.

As part of their ongoing commitment, they continue “Oral Health Awareness Programs” and “Mobile Dental Camp Programs” island wide. Link Natural is also home to internationally trusted and time-tested products such as Samahan, Swastha Thriphala, Musclegard, Kesha and many others, providing consumers with holistic wellness for generations. While strong research and development capabilities laid the solid foundation to the business, the company constantly delves into the treasures of Ayurveda and strives to introduce safe, effective and quality assured health and personal care products that serve the needs of today’s consumer to lead a healthy life. (Link Natural)

JAAF lauds PUCSL reduction in electricity tariffs & calls for continued energy policy reforms

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.