Star Garments Group wins Silver Award for ‘Energy Efficiency in Industry’ for Innovation Centre

Star Garments Senior Manager – Group Sustainability and Compliance Senura Dharmadasa receiving the award from IDB Chairman Dr. Saranga Alahapperuma. Executive – Group Sustainability Chalani Panditha is also present

Star Garments Group was recently recognised at the first-ever International Symposium on Green Industry Initiative for Sustainable Industrial Development (ISGSD), winning a Silver Award in the ‘‘Energy Efficiency in Industry” category for its Innovation Centre based in Katunayake, the first ‘Passive house factory building’ in the world and first “Passive House Design” in South Asia.

It is also the first LEED Platinum building in Sri Lanka to be certified under latest LEED V4.

The event, organised by the Industrial Development Board (IDB) and Industries Ministry was held on 20-23 June at the BMICH, Colombo.

The industrial sector is a significant energy consumer. Through the usage of passive house principles in renovating an old factory, Star Garments has taken an innovative approach to enhance its energy efficiency and reduce environmental impact.

The adherence to these principles in its Innovation Centre achieved a reduction of energy usage by up to 70% and Zero kWh/m2a heating demand compared to a conventionally “efficient” modern industrial building of the same size. This remarkably lowers greenhouse gas emissions and operational costs. It also enhanced indoor environmental quality, boosting employee productivity, and occupational health.

The passive house design emphasises super insulation, airtightness, and heat recovery systems to minimise energy consumption, setting a new standard for industrial buildings in tropical climates. Star’s Innovation Centre has also been awarded the 2020 AIA New York (AIANY) Merit Award in sustainability and the 2021 Passive House International Award.

Following the establishment of its Innovation Centre in 2017, Star continued to invest in becoming a more sustainable entity. Today, eight of its factories are LEED certified, with two achieving Platinum status, four Gold, and two Silver. Further, on its unwavering efforts towards combating climate change, Star has committed to Science Based Targets initiative (SBTi) and has been maintaining carbon neutrality across all its operations for five years. Star also continues to reduce its carbon footprint through investments like its 4.9 megawatts of rooftop solar capacity and the transition to biomass boilers in its largest factory.

Sri Lanka is rated as a water risk country by the Aqueduct tool of the World Resources Institute, to safeguard this precious resource, Star conserves around 54 million litres of water every year by recycling wastewater and reusing AHU Drain water for various purposes within its plants.

Star Garments is today a catalyst in the growth of Sri Lanka’s apparel sector with over four decades of experience, with the world-class apparel sourcing, design and manufacturing company currently employs a team of over 9,000 people.

This achievement not only highlights Star’s leadership in sustainability but also reinforces its commitment to maintaining high standards in its continued pursuit towards embracing excellence in ESG.