SLT-MOBITEL clinches six prestigious awards at National Project Management Excellence Awards 2024

At the recent National Project Management Excellence Awards 2024 held at Hotel Galadari in Colombo, SLT-MOBITEL, the National ICT Solutions Provider, secured six prestigious awards. These accolades underscore SLT-MOBITEL’s dedication to pioneering innovative solutions, driving digital transformation, and enriching the lives of Sri Lankans through their exceptional achievements.

The awards showcased the dedication of the respective SLT-MOBITEL teams in delivering the highest standards in project management and ability to deliver solutions that make a difference across diverse sectors. The company’s revolutionary Research and Development initiative, the ‘Embryo’ Team clinched three Gold awards for their groundbreaking projects and project management skills in various sectors.

The Embryo was also recognised with a gold award for the project ‘The Aisle’, a GenAI-based enterprise knowledge hub solution, under the category Best Managed Project in AI and Data Science category. The project ‘GrowMentor’, an image recognition-based plant disease management solution was presented Gold for the Best Managed Project in the Agriculture and Livestock Development Sector. The Team’s ‘Park n Pay’ project, a cloud and edge ML-based parking management solution, was honoured with Gold for Best Managed Project in ICT Networks & Communications. Additionally, the Embryo team secured a silver award for ‘SenseGrid,’ an AI and IoT-based solution for factory automation, recognized as the Best Managed Project in the Manufacturing Sector.

Other SLT-MOBITEL projects that received silver award was the ‘Duthaya Mobile App’, a mobile marketplace connecting local demands and freelance messengers, awarded as the Best Managed Innovative Project, devised by SLT-MOBITEL’s Product Development & Management team. The ‘Fully-fledged mobile application for the Sri Lankan Embassy in the UAE’, managed by SLT-MOBITEL’s Global Business SBU team with software development undertaken by the SLT IT team, was honored with Silver for the Best Managed Project in ICT Services Solutions.

Fonterra Brands Lanka marks World Environment Day with focus on land restoration

Growing Australia-SL business links, a laudable trend – Australian H.C.

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.