Sri Lanka’s new govt can’t take “many actions” against past corruptions: cabinet spox

ECONOMYNEXT – Sri Lanka’s new government under President Anura Kumara Dissanayake cannot take many actions against past corruption because it is not stable amid an election period, Cabinet Spokesman Vijitha Herath said.

President Dissanayake’s Marxists party Janatha Vimukthi Peremuna (JVP) before the presidential election promised to take immediate legal action on the past alleged corrupt deals.

Those alleged deals include a bond scam involved with former president Ranil Wickremesinghe and recovering stolen assets from the family members of former leader Mahinda Rajapaksa.

However, Namal Rajapaksa, son of Rajapaksa last week challenged the JVP-led coalition government to start actions against him to recover alleged stolen assets as claimed in public, while Wickremesinghe said he has nothing to do with the 2015 bond scam.

“Actually we have passed only a few days. We want some time,” Herath told a weekly Cabinet press briefing on Tuesday in Colombo.

Eliminating corruption, punishing those involved in such corruption, and recovering the stolen assets within and outside the country were the key pledges made by Dissanayake and his party officials during a more than 32-month campaign for the presidency.

“There is no stable government yet. It’s just that we have only an executive president and there is a three-member cabinet only. This is an election period. After this election period, we can implement stable government (policies),” Hearth said.

“This is a transition period. Because of that transition period, we cannot take many actions against those bribes and corruption.”

After his election, President Dissanayake dissolved the parliament following the appointment of a three-member cabinet including him. His party hopes to win the parliamentary polls scheduled for November 14 at least with a simple majority.

Herath, however, said strong legal actions will be taken against those who have been alleged of stolen assets.

“As far as the stolen assets are concerned, there is a process. There are laws and regulations. According to those laws and regulations, we will take tough actions in the near future.” (Colombo/October 08/2024)