Swisstek Aluminium pledges to deliver  Sri Lanka’s most reliable solar mounting systems

Solar mounting systems by Swisstek Aluminium designed to securely hold solar panels

Swisstek Aluminium pledges to assist Sri Lanka in turning its renewable energy goals for 2030 into reality with its cutting-edge solar mounting systems. As the country aims to create a clean energy future, Swisstek Aluminium provides solutions with modular, prefabricated mounting systems engineered to withstand the island’s challenging weather conditions, from coastal humidity to high wind zones, the company said in a statement.

Swisstek Aluminium mounting systems are manufactured using high-grade corrosion-resistant aluminium, making them suitable for both residential and commercial applications across a variety of roofing types, including asbestos/cement sheets, corrugated steel sheets, and clay or concrete roof tiles. Designed to be lightweight without compromising strength, these systems allow for fast, straightforward on-site assembly and full compatibility with earthing and lightning protection features.

“Buyers often prioritise panels and inverters but tend to overlook the mounting structure, which is the most critical part of any solar system. At Swisstek Aluminium, we design mounting systems specifically to withstand the island’s toughest climate conditions, offering a 10-year warranty, excellent wind resistance, and full compatibility with all roof types. When investing in a solar system expected to last 25 years, we urge consumers to carefully consider the durability and strength of the mounting structure. Not all mounts meet the necessary standards, and choosing the wrong one can lead to leaks, damage, or even system failure,’’ said Swisstek Aluminium CEO Thilan Dharmarathne.

Swisstek mounting systems offer over 30 years of durability, and are compatible across various installation sites, including flat roofs, ground installations, and elevated solar structures that are used for both industrial and commercial needs. Swisstek’s solutions are backed by an extensive range of international certifications, including ISO 9001:2015 – Quality Management, ISO 14001:2015 – Environmental Management, ISO 50001:2018 – Energy Management, ISO 14064-1:2018 & ISO 14064-3:2019 – Greenhouse Gas Verification, and Green Label Certification from the Green Building Council of Sri Lanka (2021–2025), reinforcing their reliability.

Having earned the trust of over 400 solar companies across the island with over 15 years of proven reliability. Swisstek Aluminium’s mounting systems go beyond simple support structures. Backed by a proven track record, world-class certifications, and a deep commitment to sustainability, Swisstek Aluminium is not just supporting Sri Lanka’s solar transition but will drive the country to be greener and more energy independent.