President advocates boosting cultivation of high-quality cinnamon varieties

Inaugurates official website and new Department of Cinnamon Development in Galle

Receives 10-year roadmap for industry promotion, a technical publication titled ‘Cinnamon Handbook’

Calls for a strategic plan to restart cinnamon cultivation from Puttalam to Hambantota; attract new investments in various industries, including information technology

President Ranil Wickremesinghe yesterday asserted the importance of boosting the cultivation of high-quality cinnamon varieties, noting Sri Lanka’s legacy as a leading cinnamon producer and exporter.

He made these remarks at the inauguration of the main office of the newly established Department of Cinnamon Development and launched its official website yesterday in Karandeniya in Galle.

The initiative originates from a proposal in the 2023 Budget, aimed to revitalise the Ceylon cinnamon industry.

During the opening ceremony, Wickremesinghe was presented with a 10-year roadmap for the industry’s promotion and a technical publication titled ‘Cinnamon Handbook’.

He also awarded Good Agricultural Practices (GAP) and Geographical Indication (GI) certificates to selected cinnamon entrepreneurs.

The President highlighted that each acre of land should be maximised for productivity with a focus on cultivating high-quality cinnamon varieties.

Wickremesinghe stressed the importance of enhancing cinnamon production and quality.

He highlighted that each acre of land should be maximised for productivity with a focus on cultivating high-quality cinnamon varieties.

The President also asserted the need for expanding cinnamon cultivation areas and integrating cinnamon with other crops to potentially triple or quadruple production.

He also underlined the necessity of boosting sales alongside increased production.  The President suggested leveraging both local and international expertise to improve market reach, stating that the Government is ready to support companies willing to take on this responsibility.

“We are re-establishing this department after 200 years to revive the development of cinnamon cultivation in the country. The primary responsibility of this department is to enhance cinnamon production, starting with increasing output. We need to focus on cultivating high-quality cinnamon varieties and expanding the area under cultivation,” he said.

He also pointed out the importance of transitioning from an import-based economy to an export-driven one to ensure the country’s economic stability.

“With the right economic policies, we have managed to free ourselves from bankruptcy and reduced our debt by about $ 8 billion. If we do not transition to an export economy, our country’s economy will collapse again in 15 years. Therefore, we must swiftly adopt a new economic system and earn foreign exchange through exports,” he added.

Wickremesinghe called for a strategic plan to restart cinnamon cultivation from Puttalam to Hambantota and attract new investments in various industries, including information technology.

He reiterated the importance of maintaining the current path of development to secure the nation’s future.