AKD’s visit to India was on routine invitation: high commissioner to Sri Lanka

ECONOMYNEXT — Sri Lanka leftist leader Anura Kumara Dissanayake’s recent high-profile visit to India was on a routine invitation generally extended to eminent persons from other countries and not at all unusual, according to Indian High Commissioner Santosh Jha.

The high commissioner told EconomyNext on the sidelines of an event in Colombo on Tuesday March 05 that the invitation was part of a visitation scheme by the Indian Council for Cultural Relations, an autonomous organisation of the Government of India, involved in India’s global cultural relations, through cultural exchange with other countries and their people.

“It was a normal invitation to a Sri Lankan leader. We have a scheme, by which we bring business leaders, political leaders and cultural leaders from other countries to India, called the Distinguished Visitors Programme of the Indian Council for Cultural Relation. It was under that scheme that he was invited,” said Jha.

Asked if other presidential candidates from Sri Lanka can also expect an invitation, the high commissioner said other candidates have visited India before and if they were to visit it wouldn’t be their first time in the country.

“But if they were willing to come, they’re most welcome,” he said.

Dissanayake’s invitation was rather high-profile, however, with India’s External Affairs Minister S Jaishankar meeting him for a discussion. Commenting on this, Jha said: “A leader from Sri Lanka of a large political party gets received by senior ministers in the government. Always.”

Dissanayake’s visit to India made waves in Sri Lanka, inviting comments — not all of them kind — from Sri Lanka’s political establishment. Both Dissanayake and the National People’s Power (NPP), the leftist formation that he leads, has been consistently leading at least one voting intention poll.

Sri Lanka is constitutionally required to hold its presidential election between September 17 and October 17. (Colombo/Mar05/2024)