Sri Lanka legislators slam 49 renewables plants without tender, Adani deal

ECONOMYNEXT – Sri Lanka legislators have slammed 49 renewable energy deals running into hundreds of Megawatts each which are under consideration without competitive tenders and also India’s Adani deal  already procured at a high price.

A cabinet paper was submitted on May 21, seeking approval for 49 plants, some as large as 700 MegaWatts which have been proposed following an Expression of Interest and no competitive bidding, opposition legislator Nalin Bandara Jayamaha said.

“This paper was not on the lists of decisions released on May 22,” Jayamaha said in a debate on a new bill to reform and unbundle the electricity sector.

The cabinet paper titled ‘Implementation of Renewable Energy Projects Received Through Expressions of Interest’ listed 49 projects, he said.

The Supreme Court in a decision has said that earlier projects can be continued only if they were procured through competitive tender, Jayamaha said.

“That means only projects which were brought to competitive bidding has been permitted by the Supreme Court,” he said

“But without taking into consideration that on May 21, permission had given in a hurry. These are not small ones. There is a 100MW plant, 700MW, 80MW,  a 100MW another 100MW.

“When you total it, there is a large volume of renewable plants above 50 MW. There is a 137 MW one.

“There is a saying about ‘the running devil breaking the kitchen pot and going’ (yu-ner ya-kar kora-har binder-ge-ner yaner-var). So 49 licenses are being given to earn money in the last few months. There is no fear at all.”

State Minister for Energy, Indika Anuruddha Herath said the EOIs were called before the term of the current Energy Minister Kanchana Wijesekera.

“We have not approved the plants, we have only submitted them (indiripath kireemeer pamanai),” State Minister Herath said.

“The Expressions of Interest was not called during the tenure of this Minister of Energy. It is done not to be unfair to the investors.

“A mechanism has been proposed to acquire the renewable energy if there are resources in the locations.”

Minister Herath said the transmission grid had to be expanded to locations to bring the power.

About 10 billion dollars of investments was needed for that and the government did not have money to invest and it had to be done through private investments, he said.

“In the old law also there were enough opportunities to do irregular things (visher-mar-char-rer) and unacceptable things. We have done the new law after looking at the problems in the past.

“We cannot give a guarantee that such a thing will not happen with the new law. People can speak out in that case.”

Despite claims by Energy Minister Kanchana Wijesekera that he did not have enough powers to act under the old electricity law, a cabinet paper was put forward on May 07, in relation to approving a 484MW deal by India’s Adani Green Energy, opposition legislator Mujiber Rahuman said.

The purchase price for wind energy was 8.26 US cents for a kilowatt hour (unit).

“On November 30, 2023, a committee appointed by the cabinet itself has recommended to buy at 5.5 US cents a unit

“But the May 07 cabinet paper recommended 8.26 cents. Why is there such a big difference?”

A competitive tender for a 50 MW wind plant in Mannar was completed on May 09.

“We now have information that there are tenders for about 5 US cents,” Rahuman said. “But that tender has not been opened. We do not know why it was not opened.

“If we can get wind power at 5 US cents for a 50MW plant, why are we paying 8.26 cents for 484Mw for Adani?”

The government has claimed that Adani was given a ‘government-to-government’ transaction, Rahuman said.

“You are saying G-to-G but we know Adani is not an Indian government company. It is a private company. Why is there such a hurry to give to a company like that? That is the problem.”

Claims of greater transparency under the new law were in doubt due to such transactions, he said.

“If this is done without ministerial power, we have a reasonable doubt as to what will happen with greater powers in the future.”

The Adani transaction was also initiated before his term, Energy Minister Kanchana Wijesekera said.

“This was approved by the Cabinet before I came,” he said. “You can ask Professor GL Pieris. It was approved by the cabinet as the time. That cabinet approval has been taken forward.

“Now in the new law we have proposed competitive procurement. We have removed the G-to-G also.”

In Sri Lanka there is a practice of giving infrastructure contracts to firms in countries that give concessional loans, and not for projects done at commercial rates.

Nobody has questioned the setting up of a joint venture renewable plant in Trincomalee with National Thermal Power Corporation, an Indian state company as a government to government deal under the provisions of an older law. However the power purchase price of the project is also not yet known.

Rahuman warned that officials involved in questionable deals may have to pay the price later when deals are investigated.

“I telling the offiicals, there is the ministry secretary, other officials,” Rahuman said. “There is only four months for this administration. The Minister will not be there forever. As officials who you will have to be accountable for every deal. There will be a signature by the Secretary, signatures of other officials.

We saw what happened to Keheliya Rambukwelle (former Health Minister) secretary? I am telling official not to bow down to these.”

Some observers have pointed out that Sri Lanka has to bring back the institution of permanent secretaries (as well as permanent ministries) that existed during British rule and is still found in Singapore and Hong Kong.  (Colombo/May07/2024)