Aditya among Condé Nast Traveller’s best in ‘Rest of Asia Hotels’ 2024

Condé Nast Traveller’s coveted Readers’ Choice Awards for 2024 named Aditya among the top two hotels in Sri Lanka in the Rest of Asia category. With a near-perfect score of 98.0, which represents the overall average levels of satisfaction, the all-suite property, which was called the ‘boutique pioneer’ by Condé Nast Traveller, gained high marks for its cuisine, design, community investment, accessibility, and service while topping marks for its rooms.

The suites, each of which is named after a deity, have décor that is en pointe in representing the hues and vibes of not just Sri Lanka, but the deity as well. Each has an inherent vibrancy in its color palette while also adding serenity and privacy to the property.

With hand-picked antiques, artifacts, and collectibles adding to the beauty of the property, jacuzzies and plunge pools that look out into the Indian Ocean, and private spaces that narrate a secluded vacation, it is understandable that Aditya obtained these very high evaluations from guests.

A treasure trove of cuisine is added to the mix, each tried and tested with the best of fresh produce in an array of dishes reflecting a combination of fusion and local cuisine. The Chefs Extraordinaire are all about bringing the spirit of Aditya onto their plates with not just a heady sense on the taste buds but works of art created on a plate.

The option of dining in a place of choice, whether the beach, poolside, in-suite, or a secluded spot under a canopy of stars, Aditya pushes the bar upwards when it comes to service, with an extraordinary team. Many in the team have been with Aditya for over 15 years and comprehend not just the ethos of hospitality, but each guest as well. The advantage Aditya has is not just having a pristine property but also an amazing team who share the passion of the spirit of Aditya, reflective of its tagline – Aditya seduces your soul.

Colombo Tea Traders’ Association celebrates historic 130th Annual General Meeting

Sophos to acquire Secureworks to accelerate cybersecurity services and technology for organizations worldwide

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.