CBSL keeps overnight policy rates unchanged; latest review of IMF program awaited

The Central Bank kept its overnight policy rate unchanged yesterday as it awaited the latest ​review of a US $2.9-billion International Monetary Fund programme.

‘The Central Bank will maintain the overnight policy rate at 7.75 percent and stable inflation, healthy credit growth and steady economic expansion are the reasons for the decision, Central Bank Governor Dr Nandalal Weerasinghe said. The Central Bank Governor stated this yesterday at the monthly policy review meeting held at Central Bank head office in Colombo.

‘The Board arrived at this decision after carefully considering evolving developments and the outlook on the domestic front and global uncertainties, the Governor said.

Dr Weerasinghe said that the Board is of the view that the current monetary policy stance will support steering inflation towards the target of 5 percent

The CBSL Governor added: ‘Inflation measured by the Colombo Consumer Price Index (CCPI) remained unchanged at 2.1 percent in December 2025. However, food prices edged higher in December compared to November.

‘ This was due to supply chain disruptions caused by Cyclone Ditwah and higher demand for food during the festive season.

‘Inflation is projected to accelerate gradually and move towards the target of 5 percent by the second half of 2026. Core inflation, which excludes price changes in volatile food, energy and transport from the CCPI basket, has also shown some acceleration in recent months.

‘Core inflation is expected to accelerate further as demand in the economy strengthens. Meanwhile, inflation expectations appear to be well anchored around the inflation target.

‘The economy grew by 5.0 percent during the first nine months of 2025. Despite the slowdown in economic activity following Cyclone Ditwah in late 2025, early indicators reflect greater resilience.

‘Credit disbursed to the private sector by commercial banks and other financial institutions continued its notable expansion in late 2025.

activity and increased vehicle imports. Post-cyclone rebuilding is expected to sustain this momentum.

‘The external current account is estimated to have recorded a sizeable surplus in 2025, despite the widening of the trade deficit. Foreign remittances remained healthy during 2025.

‘Despite large debt service payments during the year, Gross Official Reserves were built up to USD 6.8 bn by the end of 2025.

‘This was mainly supported by the net foreign exchange purchases by the Central Bank and inflows from multilateral agencies. The Sri Lanka rupee depreciated by 5.6 percent against the US dollar in 2025 and has remained broadly stable thus far during this year. This includes the swap facility from the People’s Bank of China.

‘The Board remains prepared to implement appropriate policy measures to ensure that inflation stabilises around the target, while supporting the economy to reach its potential.’

DevPro and WCIC come together to accelerate women’s economic empowerment in Sri Lanka

Janashakthi Finance records 35% growth in Net Operating Income and LKR 389 Mn. PBT in Q3 FY26

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.