GMOA members to get dual interface membership cards

CH17 CEO Jumar Preena (left) exchanging MoU with GMOA Secretary Dr. Haritha Aluthga. GMOA Assistant Secretaries Dr. Prabath Sugathadasa and Dr. Chamil Wijesinghe, and CH17 Project Coordinator Tharaka Samarakoon are also present

Government Medical Officers’ Association (GMOA) and Ch17 Loyalty have entered into an agreement for the implementation of a dual interface membership card which is the Association’s first in 98-year history.

The proposed membership card can also be used as the members Privilege card which offers benefits from multiple merchants and vendors partnered with CH17 Loyalty. In addition, each cardholder will have access to a digital card and other features customised to the GMOA.

“CH17’s multi-vendor platform is one of a kind in the corporate loyalty space developed by our in-house development team,” CH17 Loyalty CEO Jumar Preena said.

“Our multi-functionality platform is designed to accommodate any complex loyalty schemes from the basic rewards point schemes to much more advanced customer authentication processes. We can provide solutions using QR, Barcode and card digit process without having an integration with the merchant’s POS system. This is an advanced process which could eliminate misuse or abuse or coupon codes by external as well as internal customers,” he emphasised.

GMOA membership can avail themselves of special discounts at CH17 partner merchants such as year-round cash discounts, and special seasonal offers.

“We are indeed privileged to be associated with the GMOA, which is one of the oldest professional bodies of medical professionals, which is nearly 98 years old to this date. I thank GMOA Secretary Dr. Haritha Aluthge for accepting our proposal to introduce our loyalty system linked to the GMOA Membership system which will add value in many ways to its members,” Jumar added.

Ch17 Loyalty plans to accommodate nearly 16,000 registered medical practitioners in the Government health services.

“This is our second project aimed at recognising the medical practitioners for their relentless services rendered to the public, the first program CARE where Ch17 Loyalty offered a similar welfare program to appreciate all levels of first responders in the state health sector during the COVID-19 outbreak which lasted for nearly two years and the entire health services were overwhelmed from 2020 to 2021. CARE was a program that recognised all grades of medical staff from attendants to drivers, minor staff to nurses and doctors.”

Also present at the event were GMOA Assistant Secretary Dr. Prabath Sugathadasa and Assistant Secretary Dr. Chamil Wijesinghe.