SL’s tourism sector seen as throwing-up part time jobs for youth

The emergence of youth as a significant section of Sri Lanka’s population is a major boost to the local tourism industry. The latter sector would have plenty of openings for part-time job seekers, Hotel Show Colombo 2024, co-chairperson, Niroshan De Silva said.

Speaking at a press briefing held recently at the Cinnamon Grand Hotel to announce the launching of the Hotel Show, De Silva also stressed that the most wonderful time is going to be July and not December, from a tourism viewpoint.

Trevin Gomez, chairman of the Show’s organizing Committee, said: “At a time of unprecedented growth within the tourism sector, hotels and resorts are increasingly focusing on enhancing their facilities and guest experiences. Hotel Show Colombo 2024 will address these needs comprehensively.

Gomez added: “To run a hotel successfully, hoteliers must embrace change and constantly seek to invest in the latest solutions to deliver the ultimate guest experiences, while simultaneously streamlining and maintaining efficiency and profitability.

“The Hotel Show Colombo unites high quality suppliers with forward thinking hoteliers who share a common vision. This vision is to support the development and successful operation of hotel businesses today and in the future.

“Hotel Show Colombo 2024, is poised to elevate the standards of the industry through adaptation of hospitality related innovations both products and services.”

Meanwhile, hotel industry sources added: “The event will take place from July 26th to 28th, 2024, at the BMICH. President Ranil Wickremesinghe will inaugurate the event alongside prominent figures from four esteemed tourism institutions, and industry leaders.

“Organized by the Sri Lanka Hospitality Graduates Association in collaboration with CDC Events, and bolstered by both state and private sector support, Hotel Show Colombo has established itself as the pinnacle of hospitality exhibitions over the past 26 years. Continuously evolving to meet the dynamic needs of the industry, this annual event serves as a vital platform for exhibitors to meet their business objectives while fostering growth and innovation within the sector.

“With more than 225 booths and stalls, the exhibition will showcase a diverse array of hospitality products and services sourced from across the globe. Visitors from Sri Lanka, Maldives, India, and other South Asian countries will bear witness to the latest advancements, innovations, and cost- effective solutions within the industry. From furniture and fixtures to cutting-edge technology solutions, property management systems (PMS), hospitality supplies, interior design and décor, food and beverage offerings, guest experience enhancements, energy efficiency, sustainability solutions, and security and safety equipment, the event promises to be a comprehensive showcase of the industry’s finest offerings.”

“Complementing the main exhibition are a series of concurrent events, including The National Barista Championship, National Room Stylist Challenge, National Tea Masters Cup Sri Lanka, Bar Champs – bartenders’ competition, and a lineup of Industry-focused master classes. These events are designed to celebrate excellence within the industry while providing a platform for professionals to showcase their skills and expertise.

“The Hotel Show Colombo 2024 is to be backed by many industry members. The main exhibition is sponsored by Principal Sponsor – Cargills Ceylon PLC, Platinum Sponsor – Pragmatic International, and Gold Sponsors – Fits Retail (Pvt) Ltd, Asian Chill Equipment (Pvt) Ltd, Venture Hotel Supplies (Pvt) Ltd, Suyamas International (Pvt) Ltd and World Of Outdoor (Pvt) Ltd. Additionally, Silver Sponsors include Celcius Solutions (Pvt) Ltd and Nestle Lanka Ltd.

Biden slaps new tariffs on Chinese imports, ratcheting trade war

Sustainable Development Council steps up efforts towards integrated SDG monitoring in Sri Lanka

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.