Security forces fully aware of Arugam Bay threat; Security tightened days ago

Sri Lanka’s security forces were reportedly fully aware of the information warning of a possible attack targeting popular tourist locations in the Arugam Bay area, as mentioned in the U.S. Embassy’s security alert for American citizens in Sri Lanka today (23).

Is it stated that consequently, steps were taken several days ago to bolster security in the region.

Around 500 police officers and Special Task Force (STF) personnel had already been deployed to enhance security in the Arugam Bay tourist zone.

Police Media Spokesman DIG Nihal Thalduwa also confirmed that intelligence agencies and other security forces are focused on strengthening security measures in the area.

He further emphasized that no intelligence reports have been received regarding such threats in Colombo or any other areas of the country thus far, and therefore urged the public not to have any undue fears.

Additionally, special attention is being given to ensure the safety of tourists visiting Arugam Bay and other provinces.

He indicated that recent information had indicated a potential threat to Israelis in the area. In response, the Senior DIG in charge of the province has initiated necessary preliminary measures, which involve securing the area by deploying roadblocks and periodically conducting checks on vehicles and individuals.

“Special security units, including the Police, STF, Navy, Army, and intelligence officers, have been deployed to ensure safety in the area. If any further information is received, immediate action will be taken,” Thalduwa reassured.

He emphasized that police stations have been instructed to coordinate and provide security for tourists, regardless of nationality.

“If we receive any information, we will take immediate action. Even now, necessary measures have been taken for that area. To other areas...that is why we are giving these instructions to the police stations because it is our responsibility to provide security to the tourists regardless of the country they belong to, so we are doing the necessary coordination and giving the necessary instructions to those police stations,” he said.

Meanwhile, the Sri Lanka Tourism Promotion Bureau has issued a statement today extending a warm invitation to travelers from around the world to visit Sri Lanka during the upcoming tourist season and assuring that all tourists can enjoy a safe and secure experience while exploring the beauty of the island.

“The highest levels of safety and security will be maintained for all visitors throughout their stay in Sri Lanka,” the statement by Sri Lanka Tourism said.

The Ministry of Defense has also assured Sri Lanka Tourism that necessary measures have been taken to guarantee the safety of tourists across all areas of the country, ensuring peace of mind for those currently staying in Sri Lanka and for those planning their visits.

“We look forward to offering every traveler a memorable and enjoyable stay in Sri Lanka,” Sri Lanka Tourism said.