‘Learn about the women’s movements of Sri Lanka’

Feminism is often considered a western concept irrelevant to our reality. It is crucial to debunk this myth by exploring the history of women’s movements and prominent figures of these movements in our own country.

Everystory is pleased to invite you to a series of public teach-outs on Sri Lanka’s Women’s Movements.

This event will feature trilingual interactive discussions, delving into the rich history of women’s movements in Sri Lanka. Additionally, participants are encouraged to experience our unique human library, where you can engage with women from different generations working on different interests who will share their memories, perspectives, and insights.

Discussions will be conducted in all three languages: ENGLISH AT 2:15 PM, SINHALA AT 3:00 PM AND TAMIL AT 3:45 PM. All events are FREE to access, and no pre-registration is required.

We encourage you to bring friends and family as we celebrate and learn about the powerful history of women’s movements in Sri Lanka.

(There will also be a children’s corner with a professional child-minder.)

Everystory Sri Lanka, established in 2018, is a young feminist organization that uses storytelling and knowledge sharing for advocacy. Their objective is to use creative practices, learning circles, and digital spaces to create inclusive and safe spaces for dialogue, for learning and unlearning, and work towards a more equal and equitable world.

The history of women’s resistance, activism and participation in shaping Sri Lanka is not widely recorded or acknowledged. The theme is titled as “movements” to leave room for the histories and stories that may not be captured in some of the writings they have been able to find, and also because it’s possible that there have been several movements.

Sysco’s Global Technology Leadership Team engages in immersive visit to Sri Lanka

US-based SaaS provider OnCoor Inc opens new Sri Lanka subsidiary

‘My hope is necessary, but not enough’ teaching and learning Feminism at the University

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.