Xi meets Sri Lanka PM as China eyes main Colombo airport development

ECONOMYNEXT – Chinese President Xi Jinping met Sri Lanka Prime Minister Dinesh Gunawardena on Wednesday while Beijing expressed its intertest in developing the island nation’s main Bandaranaike International Airport (BIA) where Japan has pledged the second terminal while Indian firm is to be given management.

Prime Minister Gunawardena’s six-day official visit to China comes after Beijing raised concerns over Sri Lanka’s decision to ban its research vessels before allowing a German research ship for replenishment early this month.

“Both countries agreed to continue to act under the friendship, peace, mutual respect and fivefold principle in international affairs that do not interfere in the internal affairs of a country,” Prime Minister Gunawardena’s office said in a statement on the meeting with the Chinese President Xi.

“It was emphasized that bilateral relations should be based on mutual respect and mutual productivity between the countries, and acting according to that policy would set a good example for both countries.”

“The Chinese President also assured that China will support the schemes necessary for the development of Sri Lanka as soon as they are presented. Chinese President assured continuous support of China to Sri Lanka’s efforts for political and socioeconomic progress. Chinese President said that China will always stand for safeguarding independence, territorial integrity and sovereignty of Sri Lanka.”

Xi also stated that the party representing the Prime Minister and other parties in Sri Lanka hope to further increase cooperation with the Chinese Communist Party (CPC), it said.

“Prime Minister thanked the President for assistance provided during the unprecedented economic crisis and extending debt restructuring facilities,” the PM office said.

“He explained the progress in implementation of decisions taken during the visit of President Ranil Wickremesinghe to China. Prime Minister also thanked President Xi Jinping for the support extended to sectors such as school education, agriculture, health, technology, culture and religion.”

Sri Lanka banned all foreign research vessels after President Wickremesinghe’s government allowed two Chinese research ships within 14 months. The first one in August 2022 called for crew change and replenishment while the second one in October 2023 came for research with a local Sri Lankan organization.

Sri Lanka has imposed the ban after strong protest by India, government officials have told EconomyNext.

Before the meeting with Xi jinping, Prime Minister Gunawardena met Chinese Prime Minister Li Qiang.

The Chinese Prime Minister assured to his sri Lankan counterpart Beijing’s assistance to Sri Lanka’s debt restructuring process continuously and help Sri Lanka to develop its economy .

“During the high level bilateral talks held today (Wednesday) in Beijing, the Chinese Prime Minister praised Sri Lanka’s economic progress after a period of economic downside,” PM office said in a separate statement.

“Premier Li Qiang said his country world also extend assistance to develop Katunayake International Airport, Hambantota Port and Colombo Port City.”

Already Japan International Cooperation Agency (JICA) last month said they will support the construction of the second terminal of the Katunayake Airport after the financial restructuring process is implemented by the International Monetary Fund (IMF).

In January, Sri Lanka government said an Indian firm is in the process of being given to manage Sri Lanka’s three airports including the main airport where the island nation has now seen an over saturation in foreign tourists. (Colombo/March 28/2024)