Shane and Shehan appointed to driving seat at Triad

Triad Ltd. has appointed Shane Wilson as Chief Executive Officer (CEO) and Shehan Samarasinha as Chief Operating Officer (COO).

The appointments mark a significant milestone in Triad’s journey as a leader in creative communications solutions in Sri Lanka. Shane and Shehan infuse new blood, and a blend of youth and international experience to Triad, further elevating its strategic and creative capabilities, in the new age of integrated communications.

Giving younger people opportunities to lead and shine is a noted hallmark of Triad’s “API” – we are all one family – culture, and its corporate ethic of ‘purpose beyond profit’. In an industry that sees frequent changes in ownership, form and success, Triad’s ability to thrive for three decades and more is attributed to its ability to revolutionise the traditional, to creatively adapt to challenges and to identify, groom and empower the right talent at the right time for the right purpose.

Driven by this ethos, Triad has proudly identified, nurtured and empowered over 100 professionals, who are now in top leadership positions across the corporate sector, fostering a new generation of leaders that are generating wealth and creating value in Sri Lanka and beyond.

The appointment of Triad’s new CEO and COO thus sees former-CEO Sarva Ameresekere transition to the role of an Executive Director, while Triad’s co-founder Varuni Amunugama Fernando remains Managing Director of the Company, and Ashika Karunathilake serves as Group Financial Officer, ensuring that the Agency’s youthful vision and leadership is balanced with the experience and oversight of the Board.

Newly-appointed CEO Shane Wilson has an impressive 30-year career in advertising, having worked at both global and local agencies. He joined Triad in 2012 as a Brand Planner and has steadily risen within the firm, serving as Chief Operating Officer for the past five years. Shane’s hands-on expertise spans specialised areas such as sports marketing, retail engagement, and consumer activation programs.

Known for his strong leadership skills and street-smart approach, Shane is adept at staying ahead of industry trends, and is also now entirely familiar with the firm’s broader goals and objectives. His ability to lead by example, rolling up his own sleeves to get the job done whenever necessary, has earned him an admirable reputation within both Triad and the broader advertising industry.

Shehan Samarasinha, the newly appointed COO who also remains as the Chief Strategy Officer, has been instrumental in Triad’s recent successes: his contributions over the past three years have led to the agency winning over 60 awards, establishing it as one of the most creative and effective agencies in the region. Named ‘South Asia Strategic Planner of the Year - 2021’ and a ‘Global Strategic Planning Leader – Finalist’, Shehan has played a pivotal role in Triad being recognised as ‘South Asia Independent Agency of the Year – 2021.’ Shehan’s global perspective and strategic acumen have seen him serve on juries at local, regional, and global award shows, including representing Sri Lanka at the Cannes Lions APAC CMO Growth Council. His dedication to the industry is evident through his speaking engagements at platforms such as SLIM BrandWeek, the ‘HotSeat’ podcast, ‘Beyond the Billboard,’ and the ‘World Ad Masterclass’ organised by the 4A’s.

Co-Founder and Managing Director Varuni Amunugama Fernando said: “We confidently welcome Shane and Shehan to their new roles, as we believe in recognising individuals with the right attitude and aptitude. We have no doubt that, with them at the helm, Triad is poised to reach new heights, reinforcing our reputation as a trailblazer in integrated communications solutions in Sri Lanka. Three decades since we started off, Triad’s incredible hunger for success, our upstart attitude to do things differently and our genuine fondness of each other remains the foundation of our ethos.

I assure the many partners who’ve trusted us on our journey that we will only grow better and stronger under the leadership of Shane and Shehan.”