Mark Surgenor elected President of Council for Business with Britain

The Council for Business with Britain (CBB) held its 24th Annual General Meeting at Westminster House on Wednesday, 24 July. The event marked a significant milestone with engaging discussions and a seamless transition in leadership.

HSBC Sri Lanka & Maldives Chief Executive Officer Mark Surgenor, has been elected as the new President of the CBB for the 2024-2025 term. In his address, he emphasised the CBB’s historical significance and its role in fostering strong trade relations between the UK and Sri Lanka. “Sri Lanka exports approximately a billion dollars’ worth of goods to the UK each year, with one-third in apparel and two-thirds in other sectors,” Surgenor noted. He underscored the importance of leveraging the DCTS for more cost-effective trade opportunities.

Outgoing President Tania Polonnowita Wettimuny reflected on her tenure, addressing the challenges Sri Lanka has faced over the past two years. “Through our collective efforts, we have achieved stability. The CBB has demonstrated resilience and commitment, especially in recognising the crucial role SMEs play in driving economic growth,” she stated. Tania highlighted the CBB’s numerous SME forums and knowledge-sharing sessions, including those on the Developing Countries Trading Scheme (DCTS) and strategies to strengthen exports to Great Britain.British High Commissioner Andrew Patrick expressed optimism about the future trade relationship between the UK and Sri Lanka. “The new UK Government is prioritising growth and partnership, which bodes well for our trade relations,” he remarked. He encouraged continued collaboration and welcomed innovative ideas to expand the trade relationship.

Incoming President Mark Surgenor and Andrew Patrick, commended Tania Polonnowita Wettimuny for her dedication and significant contributions to the CBB, acknowledging her pivotal role in advancing the organisation.

The 2024/2025 Executive Committee includes, as the Vice Presidents, Principal – Head of Deal Advisory and KPMG Sri Lanka Deputy Head of Markets Shiluka Goonewardene, and Ameena Ziauddin, Norfolk Foods Ltd. Managing Director Fadhil Jiffry will take over as the Treasurer. The Committee members for the period include representatives from Aitken Spence Travels Ltd., Global Market Technologies Ltd., Hayleys Advantis Ltd., Hilton Colombo Residence, Hirdaramani Group, John Keells Holdings PLC, MAS Holdings, and Unilever Sri Lanka.

Special invitees to the committee include Oceanpick Founder Irfan Thassim, De La Rue Director/Plant Manager Derek Mansfield, Commercial Bank CEO Sanath Manutunga, Point to Point Consulting Founder and Principal Consultant Dougie Douglas, The British School in Colombo Principal Hannah Wells, and several key representatives from the British High Commission and British Council.

Shirendra Lawrence (MAS Holdings) and Roshanie Moraes (Link Natural Products) have been appointed to the Advisory Committee to ensure the continuity of the CBB’s initiatives.

For more information on membership or CBB activities, please contact the CBB Secretariat at the Ceylon Chamber of Commerce via email at [email protected] or by phone at 011-5588861 or 5588800. Visit our website at www.cbbsl.com and follow us on Facebook at https://www.facebook.com/CBBSriLanka/ and Twitter @CBB_SL.