Nations Trust Bank invites cardmembers to Spark Connections #WithAmex this Avurudu season

As the Avurudu Celebrations draw near, Nations Trust Bank American Express has announced a line-up of benefits and privileges for its Cardmembers. Under the theme, ‘Spark Connections this Avurudu #WithAmex’, Cardmembers are invited to embrace the spirit of togetherness and celebration, to build connections that resonate within their families and friends.

Throughout the festive period, Cardmembers can indulge in a myriad of offerings from 300 merchants islandwide, both online and offline. From gifting to dining experiences, hotel stays, and convenient supermarket purchases, there is something for everyone to enjoy. These activities, enjoyed alongside family and friends during the New Year season, will spark meaningful connections.

Speaking on this, Niluka Gunatilake, Head of Cards at Nations Trust Bank said, “The Avurudu season holds a special place in our hearts, as it provides a great opportunity to reconnect with our loved ones and strengthen bonds beyond distance and time. At Nations Trust Bank American Express, we are committed to enriching these moments.”

The ‘Spark Connections this Avurudu #WithAmex’ campaign promotes the essence of the Avurudu spirit and a time of shared joy. Nations Trust Bank American Express is pleased to stand alongside its Cardmembers as they celebrate this joyous occasion, offering benefits and privileges that enhance their Avurudu experience.

Nations Trust Bank PLC serves a diverse range of customers across Consumer, Commercial and Corporate segments through multi-channel customer touch points spanning both physical and digital. The Bank is focused on digital empowerment through cutting-edge digital banking technologies, and pioneered FriMi, Sri Lanka’s leading digital banking experience. Nations Trust Bank PLC is an issuer and sole acquirer of American Express Cards in Sri Lanka with market leadership in the premium segments.

Related Topics:Nations Trust BankNations Trust Bank American ExpressNations Trust Bank Avurudu Season

Nations Trust Bank, Melwire Rolling reach MCA ‘D’ division cricket final

Nations Trust Bank American Express unveils the ‘Most Wonderful Time of the Year’

Nations Trust Bank American Express partners Resortwear edition of CFW in its 7th year

Nations Trust Bank PLC demonstrates strong performance in 3Q 2023

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.