UK’s liberalized rules of origin for SL’s garments

Upgrades to the Developing Countries Trading Scheme (DCTS) enable Sri Lankan manufacturers to source up to 100% of inputs for garments (dependent on the item of clothing) from any country for final manufacture in Sri Lanka.

The changes, due to come into effect in early 2026, will allow more garments manufactured in Sri Lanka to now enter the UK tariff-free.

Fewer processing requirements will apply resulting in the removal of the rule that two significant manufacturing processes (e.g. manufacturing of the fabric as well as the garment) must take place in Sri Lanka.

Sri Lankan garment manufacturers will gain unprecedented access to UK markets under liberalised trade rules taking effect in early 2026. The reforms enable manufacturers to source up to 100% of garment inputs from any country worldwide while maintaining tariff-free access to the UK.

Under the UK’s Developing Countries Trading Scheme (DCTS), Sri Lanka receives benefits as an ‘Enhanced Preference’ country. Current rules allow tariff free access to Sri Lankan garments if inputs are sourced from the South Asian region along with restrictions around processing. The liberalised rules will now offer Enhanced Preference countries (including Sri Lanka) the same product-specific rules for apparel (chapters 61 and 62) as lower income countries covered by the scheme (such as Bangladesh) which have ‘Comprehensive Preferences’.

The British High Commissioner to Sri Lanka Andrew Patrick said:

“We are pleased to confirm further details of the reforms to the DCTS. I know from my discussions with the JAAF, Sri Lankan manufacturers and UK brands that the changes are likely to have a significant positive impact on garment sector in Sri Lanka, while helping lower prices on the UK high street.”

The President of The Council for Business with Britain, Mark Surgenor, said:

“The upcoming changes to the DCTS will further strengthen Sri Lanka’s exports to the UK. This is a particular success story for Sri Lanka’s garment industry where the proposed changes will mean that more of Sri Lanka’s garment exports to the UK could qualify for zero tariffs. The Council for Business with Britain is very supportive of these changes and looks forward to continuing our work with businesses to promote trade between the UK and Sri Lanka.”

The enhanced trade arrangements demonstrate the UK’s role as a progressive trade partner. By simplifying rules of origin, the reforms enable Sri Lankan manufacturers to compete more effectively in global markets while maintaining preferential access to the UK.

HNB Assurance Group reports exceptional financial performance for Q2 with 30% growth

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.