‘Samagi Jana Sandanaya’ officially unveiled to support Sajith’s presidential bid

The “Samagi Jana Sandanaya” (SJS), a broad political alliance led by the Samagi Jana Balawegaya (SJB), was officially unveiled today under the leadership of SJB leader and presidential candidate Sajith Premadasa and with signing of agreements with several parties.

Several political parties and alliances, including the SJB, Sri Lanka Freedom Party (Dayasiri faction), Mano Ganesan’s Tamil Progressive Alliance (TPA), Sri Lanka Muslim Congress (SLMC), “Nidahasa Janatha Sabhawa”, and Arjuna Ranatunga’s “Purawesi Handa”, have reached an agreement to form an alliance as the “Samagi Jana Sandanaya” (SJS).

This coalition will support Samagi Jana Balawegaya (SJB) candidate Sajith Premadasa in the upcoming Presidential Election.

The ceremonial launch of the new alliance commenced, a short while ago, at the Sugathadasa Indoor Stadium in Colombo.

A faction of the Sri Lanka Freedom Party (SLFP) led by MP Jayasekara, the Tamil Progressive Alliance (TPA) which represents the upcountry community, the Sri Lanka Mahajana Pakshaya, the Sri Lanka Muslim Congress (SLMC), several other political parties have entered into this agreement under the theme - “A united country, victory for all”.

Sri Lanka Muslim Congress leader MP Rauff Hakeem, Tamil Progressive Alliance (TPA) leader Mano Ganesan, leader of the National Union of Workers (NUW) Palani Digambaran, Up-Country People’s Front leader MP V. Radhakrishnan, the Freedom People’s Congress leader MP Dullas Alahapperuma, former Foreign Minister Prof. G. L. Peiris, Sri Lanka Freedom Party (SLFP) General Secretary Dayasiri Jayasekara, former minister Arjuna Ranatunga, former Army Commander General (retired) Mahesh Senanayake and president of Government Midwifery Services Association (GMSA) Devika Kodithuwakku also signed the memorandum of understanding while Opposition Leader Sajith Premadasa and SJB General Secretary Ranjith Madduma Bandara signed on behalf of the SJB.

Additionally, the policies of the ‘Samagi Jana Sandanaya’ were also announced today while SJB leader Sajith Premadasa was officially presented as the Presidential Candidate of the alliance.