Sri Lanka leader urges to streamline procurement process in road development projects

ECONOMYNEXT – Sri Lanka President Anura Kumara Dissanayake has urged authorities to streamline the procurement process in road development projects to ensure the rural economic development goals without the contracts being given only a few.

The President made these remarks during a progress review meeting for the Ministry of Transport, Highways, Ports, and Civil Aviation on Wednesday (16).

President Dissanayake’s Marxists Janatha Vimukthi Peramuna (JVP) for years accused past past successive governments of corruption and misappropriation of public funds in government’s infrastructure projects.

“He highlighted the need to streamline the procurement process for these projects, ensuring that local communities benefit rather than allowing contracts to concentrate in the hands of a few,” the President’s Media Division said in a statement.

“He underscored the importance of developing ports, airports, and highways for the economic growth of the country, asserting that careful planning of these projects could significantly uplift the national economy.”

“In executing ongoing road development projects, he called for attention to environmental, financial, and community impacts, urging measures to minimize adverse effects and ensure timely implementation.”

Dissanayake’s review meeting comes nearly a month ahead of parliament elections in which the JVP-led coalition hopes to win a majority.

However, analysts say there is a growing agitation against Dissanayake government’s progress in fulfilling promises particularly on eliminating corruption and charging those who have been alleged of misappropriation of public funds.

Dissanayake has ordered to probe into seven cases including a bond scam, Easter Sunday attack, a murder of senior Tamil journalist, disappearances of two political activists and an academic, an alleged suicide of a businessman, and a shooting in a Southern town.

However, Dissanayake during his election campaign promised to take action against the past corruption allegations within weeks, giving hope for voters of clean governance.

The new government has conceded that it cannot fulfill many promises because it is in a transition ahead of the parliamentary polls and had sought public support to elect the JVP-led coalition and give them a strong mandate to fulfill all the promises it had made to the public. (Colombo/October 16/2024)