Back to education and its many challenges, Mrs. B tries to get me back as her Secretary

On the morning of August 25, 1991, I was back at “Isurupaya,” the multi-storied Secretariat of the Ministry of Education. The Higher Education section continued to be at Ward Place and depending on the nature of my work and meetings, I regularly worked from both places. I received a warm welcome back when I arrived, and much of the morning had to be spent speaking to the many officers, including minor employees who wished to meet me.

I could observe a sense of apprehension in many. A new government and a new Minister had arrived on the scene after over one and a half decades. There was a fear that officers would be transferred; that there would be a degree of political victimization; that certain people would use the new political machinery to settle old scores including personal ones; and that tale carrying and false and exaggerated representations would be made by trade unionists and interested parties to the new political authorities at the expense of innocent officers.

Much of this surfaced at the staff meeting I held that afternoon. Such sentiments were not openly articulated, but the pervasive sense of uncertainty, even of some fear was clear. This was not a sound basis for concentration on work. I therefore decided on an early discussion with the Minister on some of these aspects. When I met him I told him that I had been through several changes of government and that each time irrespective of party and political composition the same issues came up, in an atmosphere of uncertainty and anxiety.

I cautioned him about that permanent tribe of glib talkers and tale carriers possessing enormous acting ability who have the capacity to create a convincing illusion of the “sacrifices,” they had made for the party and manifest their eternal protective loyalty which appears to even transcend that of the leader of the party. I went on to tell him that in a long career I had seen my quota of dazzling hypocrites and careerists, and that it would be best for him to evolve some principles on which he would act, the most important of which was, hearing all sides before acting. The Minister listened, although he was under pressure from many sides. In the end there were very few transfers. The working environment stabilized and we settled down to address the numerous issues that a change of government throws up.

The most interesting feature that manifests itself after a change, and particularly when the change has occurred after a long period of time is the difficulty for Ministers to fully realize and feel that they are no longer in opposition, but in government, and that they are now responsible for policy, implementation and the management of the system. Many matters impinge as disturbing forces on Ministers. The first is the euphoria generated by the victory itself. Within limits this was proper and legitimate enjoyment which a Minister was entitled to.

Ministers are human. What is important to see is that this period does not get over extended, because if that were to happen work begins to get affected. The other disturbing factor is the dealing with the congratulatory messages pouring in and the rush of people wanting to meet the Minister. There are several categories of these including sycophants and job and place seekers. Then there are the genuine party -supporters and large numbers with individual grievances and problems. The difficulty was to get a Minister to find the time to focus on important national issues amid this kind of inundation.

Amidst all these problems there also existed the twin problems of suspicion towards officials as well as a well entrenched opposition mind set. This led to a pattern of criticizing everybody and everything. Sometimes I had to politely remind the Minister that he was now in government and that criticism should lead to examination, analysis and rectification, for which time and effort were needed, and that the sooner we get down to focusing on the issues the better it was. But with the best will in the world, this takes time.

It is not the fault of Ministers. It is humanly impossible for them to cope with the flood, instantly discard mindsets cultivated over decades, overcome their suspicions and get down to a routine of normal work. I have read in the literature that even in a mature democracy like Britain it takes a good six to seven months for a government to settle down particularly after a change of administration. In the case of the People’s Alliance government of 1994, in my reckoning it took the better part of a year to settle down. Even after that, some pent up feelings and demands such as on the labour front were still being addressed.

On September 5 we got as Deputy Minister, Professor Wisva Warnapala a well known professor of political science at the University of Peradeniya. I had met him occasionally in the past, one such occasion being when I visited Moscow with Prime Minister, Mrs. Bandaranaike. He was then holding a diplomatic post in our embassy there. It was pleasant to have him with us and also quite useful because of his intimate experience of the University sector. He proved to be a great source of strength to the Minister and all of us, handling many difficult and sensitive issues in the higher education sector with considerable tact and ability. He was also pleasant to work with, and proved to be an amiable travelling companion, when we had to go out on official delegations.

Sometime later a second Deputy Minister was appointed. This was the Ratnapura District MP Mr. John Seneviratne, a lawyer by profession. This proved to be a second happy choice. Mr. Seneviratne brought great maturity and responsibility to his tasks. He had a balanced temperament and a welcome instinct towards fair play. He was not interested in the politics of officers as long as they did their work. There were times he was distressed that the working of political processes were affecting particular officers. The fact that some of them were known to have personal leanings towards the UNP did not bother him. He was satisfied with their work and that was all that mattered.

The Minister (Mr. Richard Pathirana) on the other hand was by nature and instinct more political. He was not seriously vindictive, but could be impulsive. Mr. Seneviratne’s presence helped to balance matters at the political level. All in all it was quite a good team.

One of the earliest substantive issues that had to be addressed was the issue of teachers salaries. This was tied to the other important issue of setting up a teachers service. Within my knowledge, the question of introducing a Teachers Service was seriously considered for the first time during Mr. Athulathmudali’s period as Minister. The existing situation was a veritable jungle of categories, grades, qualifications and contested seniorities.

There were a large mass of untrained teachers, with a backlog so great that even if the existing Teacher Training Colleges worked to full capacity throughout the year, the backlog would only have grown. The only consolation if it could be so described. was, that the backlog would have grown slower. This vital issue was beginning to be addressed with the adoption of distance teaching/learning strategies. Swedish experts on distance education spearheaded this drive, helping us to break into this vicious circle of backlog perpetuation. The numbers of teachers were so large, almost 192,000 at the time, that nobody had a definite idea where some of them were.

Added to all this were a significant category of “voluntary teachers,” who taught without pay mostly in remote and rural schools, in the hope and expectation that they would eventually be absorbed into the permanent cadre. These were only some of the complications that beset the important category of teachers in this country. Mr. Athulathmudali and some of us had begun to tread warily in this minefield, with the intention of creating a Teachers Service by a process of analyzing, restructuring and rationalizing the existing arrangements.

The progress was interrupted by the Minister’s resignation in the events leading to the attempt to impeach the President. President Premadasa who took over the portfolio of Education did not have the time to drive this reform. But the officials continued to work on it, because it was clear that the existing chaos should not be permitted to continue, more particularly for the reason that a considerably overdue salary revision could not be made effective without sorting out the contradictions, the duplications and the general indirections within the service as it currently existed.

The Ministry, having gone through several drafts, refining the process with each new draft, finally got to the point of provisionally settling on a few alternative structures for the proposed service. I took these alternatives before the National Education Commission, in order to obtain the ideas and views of a broader group of people. Professor Lakshman Jayatillake the Chairman of the Commission and in particular Mr. Vincent Pandita one of the Vice Chairmen were most helpful. So were other members of the commission who showed great interest and contributed their views.

Mr. Pandita volunteered to work on our drafts and produce a workable scheme. The final outcome had to be realistic both in terms of fairness and predictability in regard to the various aspects of the service as well as in terms of affordability, when salaries had to be tied to grades, qualifications and so on. The calculation of some alternatives led to a bottom line increase of around Rs. 2.2 billion in the wage bill. This was clearly not affordable. Other alternatives, or a combination of identified alternatives had to be looked at.

It was this difficult task that Mr. Pandita undertook to address. This was in the end done, and Mr. Pandita was successful in putting forward a workable scheme which would have cost only around a billion rupees. Anything below this sum would have been both unrealistic and unacceptable because the teachers salaries which had not been adjusted for a fairly long period of time needed to be dealt with seriously, as also the Central Bank had pointed out in some of their reports.

I had just begun working on this option and obtaining a significant degree of teacher union co-operation when I had to leave for the Ministry of Public Administration, Provincial Councils and Home Affairs. When I returned in August 1994, I discovered to my surprise that the previous administration, under political pressure at election time had yielded to another option which was going to cost double, almost two billion rupees. Now, with a Presidential Election due in November, we were confronted with a set of promises made earlier to teacher trade unions.

I had to chair a committee with representations also from the Ministries of Finance and Public Administration. We realized that matters had gone too far to get back to the old rupees one billion proposal. What was now attempted was damage control. The government could not politically go back in toto on something that the previous government had promised. We were given political guidelines pertaining to relevant areas. In the end the final settlement came to around Rs. 1.8 billion. The previous administration’s decision was yet another example, all too common in our political process, of caving into demands before an election.

Very early on I resuscitated my regular periodic meetings with the Principals of National Schools and a reconstituted senior staff group. The three quarter day Development Committee meeting continued and much useful work continued to be done in it. The Minister too was active. He concentrated specially on the World Bank and other important projects. He brooked no nonsense nor excuses. He relentlessly drove the project directors to performance. It was mainly due to Minister Richard Pathirana that a considerable backlog in project performance that existed when he took over the Ministry was caught up.

In the end, projects such as the World Bank sponsored first General Education Project had a stunning 98 percent compliance in implementation, when the average compliance in foreign funded projects in Sri Lanka was as low as 15 to 16 percent. It was a great advantage to work with a performance oriented Minister such as Mr. Pathirana. It relieved me of a lot of pushing at my level. Mr. Pathirana, who before entering politics was a teacher and then a Principal of Schools, had decades of practice in shouting at recalcitrant pupils. These habits, he retained, when he became a Minister and wielded them to telling effect against non performing officers.

The Presidential elections were marred by the tragic assassination of the Chief Opposition candidate, the United National Party’s Mr. Gamini Dissanayake, at the tail end of a public meeting on the night of October 23, 1994. A woman suicide bomber blew herself up close to the stage on which Mr. Dissanayake and others were sitting. Several others too died including my former State Minister of Food, Mr. G.M. Premachandra, and a friend and former colleague as Secretary, Dr. Gamini Wijesekera.

The assassination had the hallmark of the LTTE. Mr. Dissanayake was widely regarded as a target because of his good relations with Indian governments and his role in bringing about the Indo-Lanka Accord, which resulted subsequently in the arrival of Indian armed forces to the North and East of Sri Lanka, and their war with the LTTE. Many good and able people died as a result of the bomb which constituted a grave loss to the country. The UNP was naturally in a state of shock and disarray at this unexpected blow and had to hurriedly decide on a presidential candidate.

They chose Mrs. Srima Dissanayake, the widow of Mr. Gamini Dissanayake, a lawyer by profession, but not in active politics other than as a support to her husband. The election for President was held on November 9. The People’s Alliance candidate, Prime Minister Chandrika Bandaranaike Kumaratunga, won convincingly by a record majority of almost two million votes.

After the election, the new Cabinet was being formed. At this time, one Sunday, I was relaxing at home and reading one of the Sunday papers when the phone rang. It was the Minister Mr. Richard Pathirana. “Mr. Pieris,” he said in Sinhala “A nice thing nearly happened. Mrs. Bandaranaike, on being sworn in as Prime Minister asked for you to be her Secretary. I refused and said I want you and that it would be impossible for me to release you considering the work and responsibilities you are handling. It took me quite sometime to persuade her but in the end I succeeded. I just wanted to tell you this. I hope you don’t mind,” he said.

I was touched that Mrs. Bandaranaike wanted me back. But I was a public servant and had to abide by the decision of the government. I laughed and told the Minister that it was alright and that I would continue to work in the Ministry if that was his wish. I then got back to reading the paper, when the telephone rang again. This time it was my friend and former colleague in the Prime Minister’s office, the Prime Minister’s elder daughter Sunethra Bandaranaike. When the occasion demands she has a lively satirical and even dramatic style of speaking. “Dharmasiri,” she said “Amma tried to get you back as her Secretary, but your Minister raved and ranted and created such a scene that she did not proceed further. Then later, I saw the Minister in a corner, and went up to him to see whether I could persuade him. But as I came close do you know what he said? He said, “I know, you are coming to talk about Mr. Pieris. The answer is No!” “Can you imagine this man?” were her parting words.

We enjoyed a good laugh. It was a most graphic and entertaining picture of the episode. Later, when Mrs. Bandaranaike came to Battaramulla to lay the foundation stone for the new building of the Examinations Department and Testing Service Centre, she in the Minister’s presence told me “I wanted you back as my Secretary, but this Minister would not release you.”

(excerpted from In Pursuit of Governance, autobiography of MDD Pieris) ✍️

CBK plays major role inducting Sirisena as common opposition candidate against MR

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.