Netanyahu and Modi hail Indian flydubai pilot as hero

(Reuters) - The leaders of Israel and India hailed Indian pilot Smit Machchhar as a ​hero for saving passengers after he was stabbed by his colleague in an alleged ‌attempt to crash a flydubai plane on Wednesday.

Passengers on the flight reached Israel safely on Wednesday after customers and crew foiled the co-pilot's attempt to crash the aircraft, Israeli officials said. The struggle began when he stabbed the pilot and sent ​the jet plunging nearly 14,000 feet (4,267 m) in less than 30 seconds.

Machchhar was covered with ​blood on the floor when he managed to click the release to open the ⁠cockpit door, a spokesperson for Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu told Reuters. That allowed passengers and ​crew to overpower the co-pilot and enable a second pair of flydubai pilots who were on board to ​land the jet in Tabuk, Saudi Arabia.

"He saved the lives of 174 people, including Israeli citizens and other nationals," Netanyahu said in a post on X. "All passengers are out of harm's way," he had earlier said in a video ​statement released by his office.

In a post on X early on Thursday, Indian Prime Minister Narendra Modi ​lauded Machchhar, calling him a "hero".

"In the face of the gravest danger and despite being seriously injured, he showed immense courage ‌and ⁠an unwavering resolve to protect the lives of others. His valour helped save hundreds of lives and avert a great tragedy," Modi said.

Indian authorities in Saudi Arabia said Machchhar is receiving necessary medical attention in a hospital in the northwestern city of Tabuk and they are in touch with his family and ​Saudi authorities to extend all ​possible help.

He is reported ⁠to be stable, the Indian embassy in Saudi Arabia said in a post on X.

Machchhar, who hails from India's financial capital Mumbai, underwent surgery after the ​incident, Indian newspaper the Hindustan Times reported.

According to his LinkedIn profile, Machchhar ​worked with India's ⁠SpiceJet (SPJT.BO), opens new tab airline for over 11 years before joining flydubai.

The cause of the altercation between the pilots was not clear. Flydubai said in a statement that the underlying reasons for the event remained unknown and warned against "premature ⁠speculation." ​It also suspended flights to and from Israel amid an investigation.

Netanyahu described ​the event as "a highly severe security incident", and said Saudi authorities would interrogate the co-pilot of flydubai FZ1073, which had been ​en route from the United Arab Emirates to Israel.