Sri Lanka participates in 8th Global Botanic Gardens Congress in Singapore

The 8th Global Botanic Gardens Congress was held at the Suntec Convention Centre in Singapore from 6 to 8 August under the theme “Botanic Gardens – People and Plants for a Sustainable Future.”

Around 900 delegates representing 75 countries, including botanic garden officials, Governmental and non-Governmental representatives, researchers, postgraduate students, and journalists participated in the event. The Singapore Botanic Gardens, in collaboration with Botanic Gardens International, organised the conference. This is the first time the Congress was held in the Southeast Asia region.

Scientific and experimental presentations were made at the conference, focusing on biodiversity degradation, climate change effects, and the roles of botanic gardens. Wayamba University Prof. Kapila Yakandawala, University of Peradeniya Senior Prof. Deepthi Yakandawala, and Peradeniya Royal Botanic Gardens Technology and Research Director Dr. Achala Attanayake participated and made their presentations representing Sri Lanka.

In his presentation, Prof. Kapila Yakandawala introduced the “kalugala ketala” plant found in the Agalawatta area as one of the most suitable vines that can be grown inside buildings, especially in concrete construction areas to reduce the urban heat, while Prof. Deepthi Yakandawala made a presentation on the “kekatiya” plant, which is a Sri Lankan endemic variety only available in the Horton Plains, and the “kudalu” plant, conserved in the Horton Plains and Nuwara Eliya area, respectively. Dr. Ekanayake made a presentation on the contribution of botanic gardens to the control of plant weeds.

Sri Lankan researchers met Sri Lankan High Commissioner to Singapore Senarath Dissanayake and discussed actions to be taken to develop collaborations between the Peradeniya Royal Botanic Gardens and the National Botanic Gardens of Singapore. Further, attention was also drawn to the possibility of getting assistance from Singapore for urban greening research in Sri Lanka.

The ‘Singapore Garden Festival’ was also held in conjunction with the 8th Global Botanic Garden Congress.