Indelible ink and tainted records

The government has decided to scrap the long-held legal requirement to mark voters’ fingers with indelible ink at polling stations. It is in overdrive to introduce necessary legal amendments, we are told. The reasons given for its decision is that the practice of using indelible ink causes “operational inefficiencies” and “significant additional costs”. The Election Commission has claimed that the scrapping of the indelible ink requirement is its brainchild.

The JVP-NPP government is busy amending election laws and working on a new electoral system while doing everything in its power to postpone the Provincial Council (PC) elections further. If only the election monitors had continued to pressure the government to hold the PC polls rather than focusing on relatively inconsequential matters.

The use of indelible ink is not a silver bullet capable of preventing electoral malpractices, and therefore one can argue that its discontinuation may not render the electoral system any more vulnerable to practices, such as multiple voting. But whether it is prudent to do away with such safeguards against election malpractices, relying solely on the voter identification requirement is a moot point, given the fact that none of the main political parties are respecters of people’s franchise.

The UNP resorted to election malpractices and unleashed barbaric violence to retain its hold on power in the 1980s, when it used a heavily rigged referendum to make a general election disappear. The SJB, an offshoot of the UNP, is widely viewed as sharing the latter’s political DNA. The SLFP and its allies also rigged elections. In 1999, they chased away polling agents and stuffed ballot boxes in full view of the police to win the North Western PC polls. Some of the SLFP organisers responsible for violating election laws in that despicable manner are currently in the SLPP. The TNA fully endorsed the election boycott ordered by the LTTE in 2005 and even announced it. The JVP employed brutal methods such as shooting, beheading and quartering as part of its campaign to sabotage elections in the late 1980s. What guarantee is there that such political parties are any different from the proverbial cat that calmly held a lamp on a dining table only to revert to its old ways at the sight of a mouse?

As for the legal requirement of national identity cards (NICs) and other proofs of identity for voting, one may recall that the JVP seized the NICs of thousands of people during its reign of terror in the late 1980s. Some of the current JVP leaders have declared that they will not let go of power. They stand accused of working towards a one-party rule.

The Cabinet of Ministers is reported to have decided to remove provisions related to the use of indelible ink from election laws, while retaining voter identification requirements. Accordingly, the Presidential Elections Act, the Parliamentary Elections Act, the Provincial Council Elections Act, the Local Authorities Elections Ordinance, etc., are to be amended. One can only hope that the government will not turn amending election laws into a mega political project and use it as a pretext to postpone elections it is reluctant to face.

Most of all, a watchful eye needs to be kept on the amendments to be introduced, for there is no guarantee that the amendment Bills will not be stuffed with sections without judicial sanction to further the interests of the government. It has been revealed that when the Parliamentary Election Act of 1981 was amended in 1988, the words, “any member” (of a political party) were surreptitiously inserted thereinto after ratification to provide for the appointment of persons of party leaders choice to fill National List vacancies. In 2017, during the UNP-led Yahapalana government, several sections were incorporated into the Provincial Council Elections amendment Bill arbitrarily at the committee stage to provide for postponing the PC polls indefinitely. Controversy surrounds the manner in which the Online Safety Bill was “passed” in 2024. It was declared ratified amidst a noisy protest in the House.

Indelible ink is used by the countries in this part of the world as an antidote to multiple voting. Other democracies, especially in the West, have no need for it as they have reliable voter identification systems, which are however not totally foolproof. It is not prudent to presume that the franchise and the electoral process are invulnerable in this country, given the tainted records of the political parties that remain unremorseful. Hence, it is imperative that all safeguards against election malpractices be retained and strengthened.

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.