ADB pledges over $1 billion annually to Sri Lanka in post-cyclone recovery push

Asian Development Bank (ADB) President Masato Kanda met with Sri Lanka Prime Minister Harini Amarasuriya at ADB’s Manila headquarters recently. The meeting reaffirmed the strong development partnership between ADB and Sri Lanka, with both leaders underscoring their commitment to post-cyclone recovery, inclusive growth, and advancing women’s equality.

“Sri Lanka’s resilience in the face of crises has been remarkable,” said Kanda. “We are committed to helping Sri Lanka rebuild after Cyclone Ditwah, while also investing in the country’s future by empowering women entrepreneurs and strengthening education and essential skills.”

Looking ahead, ADB is ready to provide more than $1 billion annually to Sri Lanka from 2026 to 2029. This financing will target macroeconomic stability, private sector-led growth, education and skills development, and resilient infrastructure. Key initiatives include a major digital transformation program to help unlock Sri Lanka’s digital economy, alongside support for its accession to the Regional Comprehensive Economic Partnership to deepen its integration into regional trade and investment networks.

During their discussion, Kanda emphasized ADB’s response to the devastation caused by Cyclone Ditwah. Building on emergency financing already mobilized, ADB is fast-tracking an emergency assistance loan to restore damaged infrastructure and support affected livelihoods.

With Dr. Amarasuriya serving as the keynote speaker for ADB’s International Women’s Day event, the leaders highlighted women’s equality as a cornerstone of inclusive development. Kanda noted ADB’s long-standing work as an implementing partner of the Women Entrepreneurs Finance Initiative, which expands access to finance, business skills training, and policy reform for women-owned enterprises. This partnership has helped drive lasting change, with Sri Lanka becoming one of the first countries to adopt the Women Entrepreneurs Finance Code at the national level in March 2025.

Dr. Amarasuriya also engaged in dialogue facilitated by ADB to advance Sri Lanka’s skills agenda, including discussions on referencing skills and qualifications with the Association of Southeast Asian Nations and on mutual areas of interest with the Philippines related to technical and vocational education and training.

Sri Lanka Institute of Information Technology raises the bar for academic excellence

New Board appointed to lead Unit Trust Association of Sri Lanka

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.