Bank of Ceylon celebrates 87 years in business

Bank of Ceylon (BOC) celebrated its 87th anniversary on 1 August 2026, marking another milestone in its journey as the ‘Bankers to the Nation’.

Since its establishment in 1939, the Bank has remained a trusted partner in Sri Lanka’s progress, evolving alongside the nation while supporting individuals, businesses and communities through financial strength, innovation and inclusive banking.

The Bank continues to strengthen financial inclusion by extending accessible banking services to people across diverse regions, cultures and communities, ensuring that every customer has the opportunity to participate in the nation’s economic growth.

Commenting on the occasion, Chairman Kavinda de Zoysa said, “Built on 87 years of trust, Bank of Ceylon proudly enters its 88th year as the true Banker to the Nation. Our commitment to driving financial inclusion, digital transformation, and sustainable national growth is stronger than ever. To meet and exceed customer expectations, we are focused on delivering innovative digital solutions, delivering exceptional service, and consolidating our market leadership. We will continue to build a resilient, inclusive financial ecosystem for all Sri Lankans and maintain our position as the Bankers to the Nation”.

During the year, the Bank further strengthened its nationwide presence by providing banking access across all 331 Divisional Secretariat Divisions, expanding customer touchpoints to more than 2,500 across the island and bringing banking services closer to rural, underserved and indigenous communities.

BOC continued to accelerate its digital transformation journey with BOC Flex surpassing 2 million active users, while further expanding its digital banking ecosystem to meet the evolving needs of customers.

General Manager/Chief Executive Officer Y. A. Jayathilaka said, “This milestone inspires us to continue setting new benchmarks in banking excellence. Built on trust, driven by service, and committed to transformation, we will continue to empower individuals, enable businesses, and strengthen communities through innovative, secure, and customer centric financial solutions. As bankers to the nation, our purpose remain unchanged, to help build a stronger, more resilient, and more prosperous Sri Lanka.”