Innovate’s “Akuru” Pen by Atlas Axillia, inspires young creators with sensory, cultural, and emotional connection

Innovate, the premium lifestyle brand of Atlas Axillia, recently launched an exquisite & exciting product – a cinnamon-infused ink aromatic pen. Inspiring today’s youth, “Akuru” represents a fusion of authentic culture and modern creativity, designed to empower creators to embrace their cultural roots while expressing their individuality.

Innovate’s “Akuru” Pen offers more than mere functionality. It energises the writing experience, turning a routine task into a source of excitement and creative expression through offering a one-of-a-kind sensory experience. The event held at The Sanctuarii offered an intimate, firsthand experience that captivated young consumers through a sensory journey, one that resonated emotionally and culturally, redefining how stationery connects with its audience. The Akuru Pen, with its Sri Lankan cinnamon aroma–infused ink, offers a writing experience that enhances tactile and visual interaction while fostering a strong emotional connection.

Commenting on the launch of “Akuru” by Innovate, Rashintha Ferdinando, Marketing Manager Atlas Axillia, stated, “We believe that writing is far more than simply putting words on paper, it’s an experience that shapes how youth express their character & individuality. The launch of the “Akuru” Pen is a testament to our dedication to enriching the lifestyles of Sri Lanka’s youth, blending innovation with cultural pride through its signature cinnamon scent.”

The Akuru Pen reflects Innovate’s holistic approach to product design, where sensory engagement, cultural storytelling, and youthful inspiration unite to create meaningful lifestyle experiences that go beyond functionality.

CEAT extends premium ‘S-I-S’ retail experience to Kelaniya and Horana

Ruhunu Farms unveils new facility, supporting the continued growth of Aberdeen Holdings

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.