National Chamber, NEDA organise Western Province Entrepreneur Awards 2024 in grandeur

The Best Entrepreneur of the Year 2024 – Western Province Gold Award – Union Chemicals Lanka

The Best Entrepreneur of the Year 2024 – Western Province Joint Silver Award –Everbolt Engineering

The Best Entrepreneur of the Year 2024 – Western Province Joint Silver Award –Infinity Green International

The Best Entrepreneur of the Year 2024 – Bronze Award – British Institute of Management and Technology

Western Province Entrepreneur Awards 2024 was held in grandeur on 11 December 2024, at Lotus Hall, BMICH for the seventh consecutive year. The National Chamber of Commerce of Sri Lanka (NCCSL) and the National Enterprise Development Authority (NEDA) have jointly organised this annual award scheme to categorise, reward and motivate Sri Lanka’s domestic entrepreneurs. Driven with the objective to recognise the accomplishments to encourage the business community, in the Western Province, to improve their standards of business practices, and achieve a high level of entrepreneurship focusing on the micro, small, and medium to large sectors.

This prestigious event was graced by the esteemed presence of Ministry of Industry and Entrepreneurship Development Deputy Minister Chathuranga Abeysinghe, as the Guest of Honour. National Enterprise Development Authority Chairperson/Director General W.T.R. Chandima as a special guest, NEDA Director Dhanuka Liyanagamage, NCCSL President Mr. Deepal Nelson, and many senior officials of NEDA, NCCSL, Ministry of Industry and Entrepreneurship Development. Our esteemed panel of judges were also present at the ceremony as distinguished invitees.

Awarding criteria have been set to recognise and honour the outstanding entrepreneurs in various sectors, including Industry/Manufacturing, Agriculture/Livestock/Fisheries, and Hospitality/Tourism and Other Services. There were 12 awards distributed throughout these 12 thematic areas, acknowledging the best practices. The following awards were presented: Best Environmentally Friendly Enterprise, Best Exporter, Best Productive Enterprise, Best Innovative Enterprise, Best Value-Added Enterprise, Best Energy Efficiency Enterprise, Best Entrepreneur Providing the Most Jobs for Females, Best Woman Entrepreneur, Best Youth Entrepreneur, Best Entrepreneur with Special Abilities, Best Enterprise – Sustainable Business Practices, Best Entrepreneur – Financial Performance.

The top awards of the evening, ‘Entrepreneur Awards 2024 – Western Province,’ were presented as follows: 2nd Runner-up (Bronze Award) winner: British Institute of Management and Technology Ltd., Joint Runners-up (Silver Awards) winners: Infinity Green International Ltd. and Everbolt Engineering Ltd., and Overall Winner (Gold Award) – The Best Entrepreneur of the Year 2024: Union Chemicals Lanka PLC. Additional notable awardees included: L.N.C. Creations, recognised as the Best Entrepreneur with Special Abilities, Wickramarachchi Brothers Ltd. awarded as the Best Woman Entrepreneur, Dedunu Fibre Mills was recognised as the Best Environmentally Friendly Enterprise.

The ‘Western Province Entrepreneurship Awards 2024’ ceremony celebrated the innovative spirit and dedication of entrepreneurs who have played a pivotal role in driving economic growth and development in the Western Province. The event highlighted the importance of entrepreneurship and recognised outstanding achievements in various business sectors.

Gold Sponsor: Pan Asia Banking Corporation PLC; Bronze Sponsor: MAC Holdings Ltd.; Print Media Partner: Lake house; Awards Sponsors: DSI Tyre, LOLC General Insurance PLC, Lady J; Printing Partner: Softwave, and Other Sponsors: Abhi Top Toe Well-Being, British Institute of Management and Technology Campus, Country Style Foods Ltd., Illukkumbura Industrial Automation Ltd., Nature’s Beauty Creations Ltd., Ninehearts Ltd., SALOTA International Ltd., Sri Lanka Association of Non State Higher Education Institutes (SLANSHEI), Sri Lanka Gem & Jewellery Association and Synex International Ltd.