Business of funerals, and demise of commonsense

“Aniccâ vata sankhârâ” (impermanent, alas, are all conditioned formations) — Pali stanza often recited at times of death.

“Funeral pomp is more for the vanity of the living than for the honour of the dead.”—

Paying one’s last respects to the departed at funerals is a matter of societal obligation. The problem of being a sociologist, however, is that there is a tendency to take mental notes of what goes on around us as a matter of routine. I have done this over many years with regard to funerals and death, including in my own immediate family. My maternal grandfather had written a letter to my mother detailing what should and should not be done at his funeral: no expensive coffin, no cremation, no tomb and no alms to monks but to the destitute if the living wanted to do so. My father asked that he be cremated within 24 hours. I obliged his wishes. These were minimalists in a society where people complicate death just as much as they complicate life.

In recent decades, I cannot but help realise how death and its aftermath, particularly the funeral ceremonies and associated mourning rituals have become an extravaganza of sorts, an elaborate, exorbitant and time-consuming production many in these difficult contemporary times can barely afford. But the pressure of societal practices and the associated social status signaling are so strong that not even the ill prospects of getting into debt make rationality prevail. I vividly remember from my youth, poorer relatives who asked to borrow money from my parents to offer alms to monks. My parents, while always obliging despite their own limited means, invariably lectured such people on the futility of borrowing money to offer alms, hoping their next life would be better. But my family also engaged in such rituals when it was possible in terms of time and when it was affordable, but always on a small scale. This was being rational while also not losing touch with faith. Given my Buddhist background, much of my thoughts in this essay will be based on contemporary Buddhist funeral practices and their cost implications.

Sri Lanka’s four major religions mark death in different ways. Long before the present ethno-religious communities in the country came into existence, the prehistoric societies of the island appear to have believed in some sort of an afterlife. This assumption is based on the fact that personal items were buried with the dead. More importantly, these unknown people practiced burial to dispose of corpses as indicated in excavated megalithic burial sites in places like Ibbankatuwa near Dambulla and Pomparippu near Wilpattu National Park.

In the precolonial past, the Sinhalas – Buddhists rather – disposed of their dead – the corpse wrapped in a white cloth and a woven mat (pedura) – deep in the jungles after basic religious observances in a practice known as kale gahanawa. It literally means dumping in the jungle. This practice, which was common up to the 1920s, went completely out of fashion by the early 1950s most likely under the influence of colonial rule and its cultural practices. As described by M.B. Ariyapala in his Society in Mediaeval Ceylon (1956), corpses were also disposed of in designated places called amu sohona in a practice very similar to kale gahanawa.

Even so, the more affluent in these times cremated their dead in wooden pyres similar to what is still often the practice for Buddhist monks and some laity, while the less affluent simply burnt the bodies in a stack of wood while burials were also practiced. The take-away here is, there was no mandated practice of cremation among Buddhists as is practiced today which is popularly and falsely believed to be religiously mandated. Given Buddhism’s strong focus on impermanence, it stands to reason that its doctrinal positions or practices would not have mandated any sort of lingering around death as has become the norm today.

The same contemporary cremation practices apply to Tamil Hindus too followed by different religious observances, even though in many upcountry areas people from the same religious background opt for burials. I can only fathom this variation from a cost perspective. Christians, since colonial times, have buried the dead which continues to date. But the kind of lingering that is typical today among many people applies to them too, except under exceptional conditions, depending on family and personal perceptions. Muslims, in contrast to all other ethno-religious groups in the country follow a set of burial practices that are brief, and marked by simplicity, respect and includes – in terms of ritual practices – the washing of the body, covering it in a white cloth, communal prayer and finally burial without a coffin. Therefore, Muslim death rituals and funeral rites appear to be the most minimalist, rational and cost effective.

Comparatively, other practices have become complicated, consumerist, time consuming and extremely expensive. Death and its aftermath have become fodder for organised business that have expanded since colonial times but more so in the past 30 years. We know that funeral businesses are now located in many towns and cities of reasonable size. Buddhists, Christians and Hindus have embraced these practices notwithstanding the costs and seem to perceive the indulgence as symbolic of their social milieu. This is particularly apparent when costlier ‘VIP’ funeral parlours and amenities have replaced homes, community cooking for mourners has given way to catering and religious observances are facilitated for a fee by funeral service providers. Spaces and services offered vary considerably depending on the budget. These practices however also do offer convenience given the dwindling home sizes particularly in urban settings, outward migration of family members and other factors that can impact the ways in which funerals were conducted in the past.

While this aspect of life and its end in our society have not yet been properly studied, general observations paint a picture replete with contradictions. What I have also seen in India, in addition to global Muslim funeral practices also practiced in that country, was that Hindus, Sikhs and even Buddhists carried out somewhat brief rites via cremation that did not involve coffins or time. In some cases, particularly among middle classes, memorial activities were conducted in temples or secular locations.

There was a spark of rationality in Sri Lanka during the Covid 19 pandemic, when the Dehiwala – Mount Lavinia Municipality reportedly created a cardboard coffin for easy disposal of corpses given the complications Covid deaths implicated. It cost only about LKR 4, 500.00. I was hopeful this practice could be popularised, but this appears not to have happened after the end of the pandemic. I find it unfortunate that in a society like ours, with its high literacy, we still have not been able to work out how the end of our lives could be marked rationally, with respect and giving due place to emotion but without incurring needless costs and without leaving bodies un-cremated or un-buried for days.

There is much one can learn from people and cultures whose funeral practices are minimalist but marked with respect. It is incorrect to assume that lingering around a corpse over a period of days helps to emotionally deal with death. It is for this reason that all religions do have ritual practices that help commit the diseased to the memory of the living. The Buddhist offering of alms seven days, three months, one year after a person’s death and thereafter annually or when possible is one of many such example from different religious communities in our country. Rationalising funeral rituals cannot be mandated by law. But it would be good if there was a discourse on it at the popular level that may allow some of our citizens to deal with the end of life more quickly, rationally and with respect while investing the money that may be saved for the betterment of the living.

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.