SLEIS 2026 to explore new opportunities in SL’s health economy

As Sri Lanka looks to expand the sources of economic growth, healthcare is increasingly relevant not only as a social priority but also as an area with potential for investment, innovation and economic development.

Sri Lanka’s potential in the health economy will be explored at Sri Lanka Economic and Investment Summit 2026 (SLEIS 2026), organised by The Ceylon Chamber of Commerce, on October 12 and 13, 2026.

The session ‘Reimagining Healthcare for a Modern Health Economy’ will explore how Sri Lanka can strengthen its healthcare ecosystem while developing new opportunities across healthcare services, pharmaceuticals, medical technology and related sectors.

It will also consider the role of private sector investment and innovation in improving healthcare delivery and outcomes.

The panel will feature a keynote address by Zydus Lifesciences Limited Chief Financial Officer Tushar Shroff. He will be joined at the discussion by Hettigoda Group of Companies Director Vidyani Hettigoda, Association of Private Hospitals and Nursing Homes President and Ruhunu Hospital Chief Executive Officer Raveen Wickramasinghe, Hemas Holdings PLC Deputy Chairman and Non-Executive Director Murtaza Esufally and Institute for Health Policy Director Prof. Ravi Rannan Eliya. The discussion will be moderated by Sunshine Holdings PLC Group Chief Executive Officer Shyam Sathasivam.

The session will examine how the developments in healthcare can contribute to productivity, investment and economic growth, while addressing the opportunities and challenges involved in building a modern health economy.

It forms part of Day 2 of SLEIS 2026, held under the theme ‘Positioning Sri Lanka in a Changing Global Economy: Resilience, Reform and the Future of Economic Policy’.

Registrations are now open at https://sleis.chamber.lk/. For more information, contact Alikie on 011 558 8805 ([email protected]) or Shanuka on 0701082541 ([email protected]).