‘Mitra Shakti’ exercise has strengthened India-Sri Lanka counter-terrorism partnership: Indian Army

The Indian Army on Friday said that the Joint Military Exercise ‘Mitra Shakti’ has helped both Indian and Sri Lankan forces to strengthen their strategic partnership in counter-terrorism efforts by providing a platform for sharing best practices and refining tactical approaches.

“The Indian Army and the Sri Lanka Army have demonstrated unparalleled expertise in successful counter-terrorism operations, a testament to their extensive experience and proficiency in managing complex security challenges. Through their participation in the Joint Exercise Mitra Shakti, both armies have leveraged their respective knowledge and strategies to enhance mutual understanding and operational effectiveness,” Indian Army said in a statement.

“This joint exercise has provided a platform for sharing best practices, refining tactical approaches, and strengthening collaborative efforts against terrorism. By integrating their skills and experiences, the Indian and Sri Lankan forces have bolstered their capabilities and fostered a deeper strategic partnership in counter-terrorism endeavors,” Indian Army added in the statement.

The 10th edition of the India-Sri Lanka Joint Military Exercise ‘Mitra Shakti’ began on August 12 at the Army Training School, Maduru Oya, Sri Lanka. The Exercise will conclude on August 25.

Indian contingent comprising 106 personnel is being represented by a Battalion of Rajputana Rifles along with personnel from other arms and services. The Sri Lankan contingent is being represented by personnel from the Gajaba Regiment of the Sri Lankan Army.

Mitra Shakti is an annual training event conducted alternatively in India and Sri Lanka. The last edition was conducted in Pune in Nov 2023.

As per the Ministry of Defence, the exercise aims to enhance the joint military capability of both sides to undertake counter-insurgency operations in a sub-conventional scenario under Chapter VII of the United Nations Mandate. The exercise will focus on operations in the semi-urban environment.

Exercise Mitra Shakti will enable both sides to share best practices in Tactics, Techniques and Procedures for conducting joint operations.The Joint Exercise will also enhance defence cooperation, further augmenting bilateral relations between the two friendly nations, as per the Ministry of Defence.