When a picture speaks volumes

Today’s front-page photo in this newspaper shows former President Mahinda Rajapaksa and Foreign Minister and JVP stalwart Vijitha Herath in conversation at a Chinese New Year reception in Colombo on Monday. This picture speaks volumes. Its significance and irony may not have escaped astute political observers familiar with Sri Lanka’s political marriages of convenience during the past several decades.

The JVP made a public show of its antipathy towards the Rajapaksas to win elections in 2024. It vowed to throw them behind bars immediately after forming a government. Some Opposition bigwigs have claimed that it was to settle political scores with Mahinda that the JVP-led NPP government made former Presidents leave their official residences. The JVP leaders continue to inveigh against Mahinda and other members of the Rajapaksa family, much to the glee of their cadres. They pretend that they have had nothing to do with the former ruling family. But the truth is otherwise.

The aforesaid photo may remind political observers of the pivotal role played by Herath and other JVP seniors, including Anura Kumara Dissanayake, in enabling Mahinda to achieve his presidential dream in 2005. The SLFP, which fielded Mahinda as its presidential candidate, did not throw its weight behind him in the presidential race; in fact, the then President Chandrika Kumaratunga did her best to queer the pitch for him, without success. The JVP campaigned extremely hard for him and ensured his victory.

The present-day JVP leaders are seen in some videos of Mahinda’s 2005 presidential election campaign, waving the Mahinda Chinthanaya policy framework at campaign rallies and portraying it as a silver bullet capable of helping Sri Lanka solve all its problems and achieve progress. Herath was among the key speakers at Mahinda’s election rallies. Perhaps, it would have been the end of the road for the Rajapaksas in national politics had Mahinda lost the 2005 presidential election. Thus, it may be seen that the blame for what the JVP accuses Mahinda, his family members and his cronies of having done since 2005 should be apportioned to the JVP leaders who made his elevation to the presidency possible.

The JVP fell out with President Rajapaksa as he did not fulfil some of his key promises, especially his pledge to abolish the executive presidency. It joined forces with the UNP, etc., thereafter and strove to defeat Mahinda in the 2010 presidential election, but in vain. However, it realised that goal by helping Maithripala Sirisena, who promised to scrap the executive presidency, win the 2015 presidential election. He reneged on his pledge.

Ironically, the Rajapaksas created conditions for the JVP’s meteoric rise to power, albeit unwittingly. After their return to power, they indulged in corruption, suppressed the rule of law, and, above all, bankrupted the economy in 2022, when the JVP had only three MPs and its national vote share had shrunk to a meagre 3%. The JVP effectively harnessed public anger over economic hardships to regain lost ground and win elections. It also promised to do away with the executive presidency. This pledge appears on page 109 of the NPP’s policy programme, A Thriving Nation: A Beautiful Life.

Today, the JVP is in a position to do what it pressured Mahinda and Sirisena to do in 2005 and 2015 respectively—abolishing the executive presidency. The NPP government led by the JVP has a two-thirds majority, and the Opposition is also demanding that the executive presidency be scrapped forthwith. So, the question is why the JVP is dragging its feet on its pledge to do so.

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.