Reckless littering  places sacred city  of Anuradhapura at stake

Empty lunch packets and beer cans strewn along the reservoir

Rampant pollution of environment has not only tainted the cradle of one of the oldest civilisations in the world, but also become breeding ground for many health hazards

Resort owners in area lament reckless behaviour and callous attitude of polluters threaten international image of World Heritage Site

Pressing island-wide issue of reckless trash disposal calls for ‘individual system change’

The careless waste disposal by pilgrims and other visitors to the sacred city of Anuradhapura, which is a UNESCO World Heritage Site, has resulted in fouling many archaeologically and historically important hotspots including the country’s first stupa (Thuparamaya) and country’s first man-made tank – Abhaya Wewa. The mounting garbage strewn around these historically-significant landmarks includes an alarming quantity of plastic and polythene. Lunch sheets, plastic water bottles, yoghurt cups carelessly disposed to the environment have not only tainted the cradle of one of the oldest civilisations in the world, but also become a breeding ground for many health hazards.

The nearby precincts of Thuparamaya – the earliest documented stupa in the country built by King Devanampiyatissa, is a popular ‘parking space’ used by a number of buses and vans transporting pilgrims. Empty lunch packets, wrappers and plastic thrown next to scattered ancient ruins of the heritage site is a revolting sight unbearable to behold by a heritage-lover.

Many residents of the area including resort owners and other nature and heritage enthusiasts collective resonate that the irresponsible behaviour of the public has placed the sacred city at stake. “The municipal council alone is not responsible for clearing the garbage pits made by the visitors to area; they need to take back what they brought with them instead of callously tossing polythene, plastic etc. to the nature,” charged one resident of the area who makes a living by selling flowers to the pilgrims.

Dating back to the 4th century BC is Abhaya Wewa also known as Abhayawapi or Basawakkulama, island’s oldest reservoir. Built during the reign of King Pandukabhaya, the tank mirrors the engineering prowess of the ancient Lankan. Covering an extent of 174 ha. of water, more than 2,500 years later, this irrigation marvel still continues to nurture Anuradhapura’s agricultural pursuits. The iconic Ruwanweli Maha Seya towering beyond the waters of the reservoir is a beauty to behold.

The tank is also a source of living to many fisherfolk who depend on a daily catch out of it. It is also a potential ground of prey to numerous birds. Dogs in the area lapping its waters to quench their thirst is a common site. The bunt of this waterbody which plays a pivotal role in everyday lives of the Anuradhapura folk, is dotted with polythene bags, commonly called shopping or ‘siri-siri’ bags. Empty milk packets, beer cans and plastic water bottles which are scattered seem to slight not only the dexterity of our forefathers but also their inherent nature-loving spirit. The architects of our hydraulic civilisation who first championed sustainable living thousands of years ago before it became a catch-word, would lament if they are to witness the mounting trash in the epicentre of the island’s civilisation.

The resort owners in the area lament that the reckless behaviour and callous attitude of the polluters threat the tourism industry, damaging the international image of the country. “Very often we employ cleaners to clean the surroundings and during the rainy season, all the pollutants get washed away to the waters which is simply a crime.”

At a time when ‘system-change’ has become a buzzword, each Sri Lankan should be conscious of the fact that the system at large can only change with an individual behavioural shift. Until then no municipality or penalties can do wonders.