Importance of staying together

I was on a long-distance bus when two young women sat behind my seat. As usual they started talking about their children. One woman said,  “Kids of divorced parents are kicked back and forth like a football.” The image of a man kicking a football grabbed my attention. When parents go in different directions after a divorce, children become footballs between mother and father.

Any type of separation, or divorce, can have devastating consequences on children. Sometimes the custody of a girl is given to the mother at the conclusion of a divorce case. It is not easy for a girl to face life when she loses one of her parents for no fault on her part.

To a disgruntled couple divorce may be the only solution. For them a divorce has great appeal. Sometimes the sheer incompatibility may force the parents to seek a divorce. In law, however, incompatibility is not a ground for divorce. In order to file a case for divorce a spouse has to prove impotency at the time of marriage, malicious desertion or adultery. Our lawmakers are planning to introduce some amendments to the existing law. I do not know whether they are going to make it easy for parents to end their marriage through divorce. However, the aftereffects of a divorce will affect the children. Ending a marriage through divorce may be OK for the parties involved, but it is not totally satisfying to the kids.

No matter how much love and caring divorced parents devote to a child, it will not ease the radical restructuring of the child’s world. If you wish to probe the restructuring, launch a study of children of divorced families. The modern trend is that divorced parents continue to love and support their children although they do not live together.

A divorce usually splits an integrated family into two segments, each with its own nucleus. When parents and children live under one roof, kids become the nucleus. A divorced father or mother moves to the centre of his or her own new world leaving the children out. In happy families children grow up while becoming the centre of the family. After a divorce, children feel acute loneliness. They have no home to return to after school. Nobody is waiting for their arrival.

When children find that their parents have gone in different directions, they depend on their peers or try to deal with their problems alone. Like a blacksmith forges iron in the intense heat of a roaring fire, children forge their own values in the intense heat of their inner lives. They try to find a way out of their troubled life.

Human life has many core values. In a marriage children think that their parents are role models. They would never criticize their parents. After a divorce, children feel left out and begin to disrespect their parents. If you ask a child in a divorced family, he will say, “I love my mother, but I don’t respect her.” The same sentiments apply to the father as well.

Those who have read fairy tales are familiar with a dashing young man meeting a beautiful young woman. They fall in love and get married. They live happily with their children. However, the scenario has changed in the 21st century. Today a dashing young man meets a beautiful young woman. They fall in love and live together. Sometimes they get married and produce children, but ultimately they get divorced.

The percentage of women who are married has declined in most Western countries. In the United States the number of married couples has increased over the past two decades. The institution of marriage has changed considerably. Apart from that, when people get married the probability of divorce is very high today. Although divorce rates have been declining in the United States since they peaked in 1981, about half of all first marriages ended in divorce. The rise in divorce is not confined to the United States. The divorce rate has accelerated almost in all the industrialised countries. Even in Asian countries, such as South Korea, the divorce rate is very high.

Changes in marriage and divorce trends have doubled the number of single parent households in the United States and elsewhere. As a result, most children are forced to live with their mother or father until they turn 18. In most single parent families, it is the mother, rather than the father, with whom the children live. Single parent families are often economically less well off. This has an adverse impact on children. What is more, the separation of parents is often a painful experience for children. Sometimes children would blame themselves for the breakup of the family. There is evidence to suggest that children of divorced families are not well adjusted to face life’s problems than those who come from happy families.

John Gottman, a University of Washington psychologist, has studied the emotional glue that binds couples together and the corrosive feelings that can destroy marriages. An early warning signal that a marriage is in danger, Gottman finds, is harsh criticism. In a healthy marriage husband and wife feel free to argue on household matters. There is a difference between complaints and personal criticisms. In a complaint a wife specially states what is upsetting her. In a personal criticism she uses specific grievances to launch an attack on her husband. This kind of criticism leaves the husband ashamed. In his defence he might resort to stonewalling. He would withdraw from the conversation by responding with a stony expression and silence. It sends a powerful message. Stonewalling comes up mainly in marriages heading for trouble.

However much you try to prevent divorce, some marriages will go on the rocks and children will be left alone. Those who face such a situation need not worry unnecessarily. From an existential standpoint we are fundamentally alone despite the presence of our parents, friends and well-wishers. It is necessary to remember that we arrive and depart this life alone. Therefore you have to accept the naturalness of loneliness as a liberating feeling. Accept your loneliness as a tincture of your soul. Psychologist Carl Jung who spent much of his childhood alone said his loneliness opened him to dreams and a spiritual life. Throughout the ages mystics, artists and seers have tapped this emotional impetus for more extensive access to themselves.

If you happen to be a child of a broken family, this is the ideal time to improve your skills and face life bravely. There is nothing impossible to someone with a firm determination to reach his goal.

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.