Global Environment Facility funds chemical disposal project in Sri Lanka

ECONOMYNEXT – The Ministry of Environment has been granted 5 million dollars by the Global Environment Facility (GEF) for a chemical disposal project in Sri Lanka.

A workshop was held to launch the project to dispose of POP pesticides in the agriculture sector and mercury and waste in the healthcare sector.

Even though Sri Lanka does not manufacture products which contain POPs or mercury, many products containing these substances are imported to the country for various uses every year.

“Though stringent regulations have been introduced, a lack of capacity in the application of these regulations results in the continued mismanagement of chemical imports to the country,” the UNDP said in a statement.

The ‘Integrated Management and Environmentally Sound Disposal of POPs Pesticides in the Agricultural Sector and Mercury & Waste in the Healthcare Sector in Sri Lanka’ project is implemented by the Environment Ministry and the United Nations Development Programme.

The project aims to improve the implementation of regulations, strengthen national systems and capacities in chemical management, and support the transformation of healthcare waste management systems in Sri Lanka.

It contributes to fulfil national commitments towards Stockholm, Minamata, Basel and Rotterdam Conventions, while addressing other issues related to management of chemicals and waste in Sri Lanka, B K Prabath Chandrakeerthi, Secretary, Ministry of Environment said.

“This is a good financial and technical assistance opportunity for Sri Lanka to improve the regulatory framework related to waste and chemical management and support the transformation of healthcare waste management systems.”

UNDP said the project spanning both the Health and Agriculture sectors, offered a “holistic strategy for chemical and healthcare waste management to address complex environmental and social challenges effectively.”

“It is only through a coordinated approach that we can meet the ambition of saving both people and the planet,” Azusa Kubota, Resident Representative, UNDP in Sri Lanka said.

UNDP is “firmly committed to supporting the Government of Sri Lanka and its people on their journey in building a solid chemical waste management system.”

The Ministry of Environment will implement the project with support from UNDP in Sri Lanka over 5 years with an expected end date of October 2029. (Colombo/Jul5/2024)