Dr. Trevor Mendis joins Odel Board

Odel PLC has appointed Dr. Trevor Mendis to its Board as an Independent Non-Executive Director.

He is a strategist, management consultant, banker, and a pracedamic who blends his wealth of hands-on local and global exposure into the corporate world. Presently he works as Senior Management Consultant and a Member of the Board of Study for the Postgraduate Institute of Management (PIM), University of Sri Jayewardenepura.

From humble beginnings as a Junior Banker, Dr. Mendis rose up in the ranks to Assistant General Manager, Corporate Planning and Business Development and Leasing in the banking industry. He has also worked at ANZ Bank, New Zealand, a Fortune 500 Company and was a member of the Strategic Planning Committee at ANZ bank for the North Shore Region of Auckland, New Zealand.

He shifted from banking to the consultancy and academic arena in 2008 and became the Chief Executive Officer of a private university in Sri Lanka. Since then, Dr. Mendis’ corporate and academic career trajectory has been phenomenal and impressive. He served as an External Consultant for the United Nations (Intl Trade Centre of Geneva) on two occasions and as a Lead Consultant for the Asian Development Bank (ADB) on many occasions in Sri Lanka. He was head hunted by the UN and the ADB on all these occasions.

He has served as a Non-Executive Director and the Chairman of the Strategic Direction Committee of the Sri Lanka Insurance Corporation in 2019 purely on merit. He has been bestowed with two international awards in Singapore and India on merit for his achievements.

He was a member of the Final Panel of Judges for the annual awards organized by the Institute of Chartered Accountants and National Business Excellence Awards organized by the National Chamber of Commerce (NCC). He has addressed Research Conferences as the International Guest Speaker and Chief Guest both locally and internationally.

He currently focuses on specialized arenas namely Strategic Affairs, International Trade, Corporate Governance, Re-engineering of Companies, Banking, Policy Formulation, AML, Data-driven Decision Making, Domestic Revenue Generation, Enhancement of Foreign Exchange Reserves, Socio-economic aspects, Sustainability, and Geopolitics as a Consultant and an Advisor.

He has evaluated more than 1,000 balance sheets across the world in his career. He possesses many unique selling propositions with unparalleled distinctive competences.

Dr. Mendis is an AIB qualified banker, with a Post Graduate Diploma in Financial Management from the Institute of Chartered Accountants in Sri Lanka. His first Master’s Degree is from the Postgraduate Institute of Management, University of Sri Jayewardenepura. His second Master’s Degree, (MSc in Management), is from the prestigious Massey University in Auckland New Zealand, and his Doctorate on Corporate Governance is from the University of Kelaniya.