SL Ambassador to Iran Prof. Fazeeha Azmi presents credentials

Islamic Republic of Iran President Dr. Masoud Pezeshkian (right) receives the Letter of Credence from Sri Lanka’s Ambassador Prof. Fazeeha Azmi

The Ambassador of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka to the Islamic Republic of Iran, Prof. Fazeeha Azmi, presented her Letters of Credence to the Islamic Republic of Iran President Dr. Masoud Pezeshkian at Office of the President in Tehran on 22 July 2026. She was the first lady Ambassador to have been appointed from Sri Lanka to the Islamic Republic of Iran.

Ambassador (Prof.) Fazeeha Azmi conveyed the warm greetings and best wishes of the President of Sri Lanka Anura Kumara Disanayaka and expressed confidence in the continued growth of bilateral relations between the two countries. She expressed her intention to explore new avenues of cooperation between the two countries, particularly in view of the 65th anniversary of the establishment of diplomatic relations between Sri Lanka and Iran, which will be commemorated in 2027.

President (Dr.) Masoud Pezeshkian congratulated Ambassador (Prof.) Fazeeha Azmi on the commencement of her new tenure as the Ambassador of Sri Lanka to Iran. He reaffirmed Iran’s interest to further strengthening the relations under the full activation of the existing bilateral framework with Sri Lanka, particularly in the economic sector. The discussion also focused on promoting tourism and higher education sectors of cooperation between Sri Lanka and Iran with the aim of deepening the people-to-people contacts.

While appreciating for all assistance, extended by the Government of Iran to Sri Lanka, Ambassador (Prof.) Fazeeha Azmi appreciated the Iran President’s commitment to further enhance bilateral relations and underlined the importance of further exploring trade, medicine and engineering services opportunities between the two countries. The Ambassador also expressed that Sri Lanka expects sustainable peace in Iran. The President assured his fullest support for the Ambassador’s work plan and encouraged continued engagement to explore new avenues of cooperation.

Ambassador (Prof.) Azmi is a senior academic, with a career spanning over 20 years in teaching, research, and scholarly work in the fields of youth, poverty and livelihood changes, women and migration, internal displacement, tourism, small-scale fisheries, urban cultural heritage and post-war development in Sri Lanka. She held appointments in Sri Lanka, India, Norway, Fiji, and Canada and contributed extensively to national and international research and academic collaborations.

Prior to being appointed as the Ambassador of Sri Lanka to the Islamic Republic of Iran, she served as a Professor in Geography at the University of Peradeniya in Sri Lanka. Prof. Fazeeha Azmi earned her first degree in Geography with a First Class from the University of Peradeniya. She did her M.Phil in Social Change and PhD in Geography at the Norwegian University of Science and Technology in Norway.  She is a past pupil of Mawanella Zahira National School in Kegalle district.