Port City Colombo courts Gulf capital as South Asia gateway

Sri Lanka stepped up efforts to position Port City Colombo as a gateway to South Asia’s fast-growing markets, using a high-level investor forum in Dubai to court Gulf capital and highlight the Special Economic Zone’s role in the country’s strategy to attract foreign direct investment, deepen services exports and strengthen its presence in regional value chains.

The Consulate General of Sri Lanka in Dubai, in collaboration with the Sri Lanka Embassy in Abu Dhabi, the Colombo Port City Economic Commission (CPCEC) and CHEC Port City Colombo Ltd., hosted a high-level investment promotion event in Dubai to showcase opportunities available at Port City Colombo, Sri Lanka’s premier Special Economic Zone (SEZ) and emerging international business destination.

The event, titled “Globalisation and the Sri Lankan Opportunity: Recovery to Relevance – Sri Lanka’s Moment in the Evolving Global and Regional Economy,” was held on 11 June at the Ritz-Carlton Dubai. It brought together investors, business leaders, financial institutions, chambers of commerce, property developers, real estate firms, and members of the Sri Lankan and international business community in the UAE to explore investment, trade and partnership opportunities in Port City Colombo, positioned as a gateway to South Asia.

The exclusive investment promotion event was attended by President’s Special Envoy on Foreign Direct Investments Hanif Yusoof, Colombo Port City Economic Commission Chairman Harsha Amarasekera, PC, and senior officials of the Commission and CHEC Port City Colombo Ltd.

In her opening remarks, Sri Lanka Ambassador to the UAE, Prof. Arusha Cooray, provided an overview of bilateral trade and economic relations between Sri Lanka and the UAE.

Delivering the keynote address, Dubai Silicon Oasis Director General’s Office Senior Vice President Ghanim Al Falasi, reflected on Dubai’s evolution into a global business hub and underscored the strategic access Port City Colombo offers to South Asia. He highlighted the potential for mutually beneficial collaboration between Sri Lanka and the UAE, given Colombo Port City’s strategic location.

Amarasekera presented an overview of Port City Colombo, highlighting its value proposition as a modern SEZ and its role in positioning Sri Lanka as a regional business and investment hub.

Yusoof shared strategic perspectives on Sri Lanka’s economic trajectory and the contribution Port City Colombo is expected to make to future growth. Drawing parallels with the UAE’s development experience, he noted the role similar projects had played in establishing Dubai as a global trade and investment centre. He encouraged investors to explore partnerships in Sri Lanka and leverage opportunities within Port City Colombo.

CPCEC Director General Revan Wickramasuriya outlined the latest developments within the SEZ, including its investment framework, incentives, business registration processes and upcoming projects. His presentation was followed by a panel discussion and engagement with prospective investors.

Strategically located at the heart of South Asia, Port City Colombo is being developed as a world-class, service-oriented SEZ offering a modern regulatory framework, investor-friendly policies, state-of-the-art infrastructure and seamless connectivity to regional and global markets. The project is expected to attract significant foreign direct investment and strengthen Sri Lanka’s position as a hub for finance, technology, logistics, IT/IT-enabled services, professional services and innovation.

Delivering the closing remarks, Sri Lanka Consul General to Dubai and the Northern Emirates Alexi Gunasekera highlighted the longstanding economic relationship between Sri Lanka and the UAE and said the event aimed to introduce regional investors to the opportunities available within Port City Colombo while deepening economic cooperation between Sri Lanka and the Gulf region.

The event concluded with a networking session attended by senior UAE dignitaries, chairpersons, CEOs, business leaders and investors representing sectors including logistics, real estate, banking and information technology. Organisers said the event generated strong interest in Port City Colombo and facilitated discussions on potential investment and collaboration opportunities.