Prison riots and political battles

Prison riots in Negombo have claimed 27 lives including those of seven officers and left more than 100 others injured. It is believed that a clash between a group of drug peddlers among inmates and those who opposed their illegal operations led to the deadly mayhem. A committee has been appointed to probe the violence.

The drug Mafia has flexed its muscles again. The government has embarked on an ambitious campaign to rid the country of narcotics, and rightly so. The ongoing nationwide drug bust deserves the fullest public cooperation. However, if the latest outbreak of prison violence is anything to go by, a special programme needs to be launched to root out the scourge of narcotics in prisons, where some corrupt officers are in league with drug dealers.

The mastermind behind the Negombo Prison riots has been identified. He is an associate of a powerful drug dealer, according to media reports. The netherworld of narcotics and crime has emerged so powerful that it can plunge the country’s prison system into utter chaos at will. Worse, in 2023, an underworld gang planned a commando-style operation to free a drug dealer, called Nadun Chinthaka alias Harak Kata, detained at the CID headquarters. The STF managed to scuttle their plan. We reported that the gang had enrolled some serving military personnel and a sniper for the attack to spring its leader free. Another drug leader had High Court Judge Sarath Ambepitiya and his MSD bodyguard Inspector Upali Ranasinghe gunned down in late 2004. An underworld gang attacked a prison bus in Kalutara, killing five of its rivals and two prison guards, in 2017. Successive governments have only made half-hearted attempts to neutralise powerful crime syndicates run by drug dealers.

It is puzzling why the prison authorities did not transfer all troublemakers responsible for Sunday’s clash in Negombo to other prisons, after bringing the situation under control. On Monday morning, they gave the all-clear. It was the calm before the storm; violence erupted again soon afterwards. There was a total intelligence failure. If the rioters had been sent to other prisons on Sunday itself, Monday’s violence could have been averted.

Sadly, incidents of prison violence lead to political clashes between the government and the Opposition. There have been several deadly riots in prisons during the past several decades. In 1983, about 50 Tamil prisoners were massacred inside the Welikada Prison in two separate attacks. In the same prison, 27 inmates were killed in 2012 during a riot that followed a search operation conducted by the STF for weapons, drugs and mobile phones. In 2020, violent clashes in the Mahara Prison left 11 inmates dead. All those incidents triggered political battles, with Opposition politicians flaying their ruling party counterparts for failure to ensure the safety of prisoners. If they had put their heads together and taken action to eliminate the root causes of prison unrest and violence, instead of fighting political battles, perhaps the Negombo prison riots would not have occurred.

There have been some half-hearted attempts at prison reforms under successive governments. But the structural problems in Sri Lanka’s prison system remain unresolved. They include overcrowding, delays in court proceedings, gang rivalries, drug peddling, inadequate facilities, corruption and difficulties in maintaining security in large custodial institutions. The Negombo prison is reported to have been experiencing a shortage of officers. These issues have to be resolved urgently as part of a multi-pronged strategy to make prisons safe. Rhetoric won’t do.

Following the Mahara prison violence in 2020, President Anura Kaumara Dissanayake, who was an Opposition firebrand at that time, went ballistic in Parliament, condemning the then SLPP government for its failure to protect prisoners. A video of his fiery speech is doing the rounds in the digital realm. It has become grist for the Opposition’s mill.

Opposition politicians are now doing what the JVP did in the past; they are tearing into the JVP-NPP government over the Negombo prison violence. But prisons will not be any less vulnerable to violence even if the holders of power change; those who are berating the current administration may find themselves in the dock one day if they form a government.

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.