Less Known Facts on Kamala Harris

There’s no denying the fact that the Democratic presidential candidate and possibly the first woman president of the USA is hugely dynamic, very ambitious, a successful career woman, beautiful and feminine. Not only will Kamala Harris be the 47th President if she wins the race in November, which she can do as her ratings rises rapidly and Trump shows strain and yes, trepidation, which he tries to cover with his usual bluff and bluster. She may also be the first Black and South Asian American president; Obama being considered to be first African American Prez. A very significant fact is that powerful women are rallying around her and endorsing her strongly. They are led by Nancy Pelosi, recently 52nd Speaker of the House of Representatives. Jill Biden, Hillary Clinton and Michelle Obama are close behind; Hollywood stars too like Beyonce.

Her father, Donald Jasper Harris is a Jamaican American economist and Professor Emeritus at Stanford University. He somewhat dissociated himself with her after she in a post previously held, connected Jamaicans with drugs. Her mother, Shyamala Gopalan, (1938 -2009), moved from Madras to the US to continue her higher studies and was at the University of California, Berkeley, where she met her husband. They married in 1963. She was into cancer research and made a name for herself. When Kamala was seven in 1971, her parents divorced, and her mother took sole parentage of Kamala and her younger sister Maya.

The small father-absent family lived in a predominantly black area classed as lower middle class on Bankcroft Way, West Berkeley, above a day care center, for around six years, her mother attending graduate school at the University of California. The two girls were raised as ‘black’ and to be proud women. Later, for 16 years, Shyamala worked at Lady Davis Institute for Medical Research and McGill University Faculty of Medicine, Montreal, where Kamala had her middle and secondary schooling. The mother kept her Indian-ness intact and took them often to visit her relatives in Madras/Chennai.

Kamala’s grandmother influenced her very much. Her names are Indian associated: Kamala being lotus and her second name Davi or Devi being a tribute to Goddess Lakshmi. Her sister, (b 1967) is named Maya Lakshmi – again directly Indian. She is a lawyer, public policy advocate and writer. She was one of three senior policy advisors in Hillary Clinton’s 2016 presidential campaign.

She worked for her sister’s bid for president candidate nomination in 2020 and will surely be very busy in the present one. Her daughter, Meena Harris, is a Harvard educated lawyer and very close to her aunt whom she says is her role model. Kamala has been photographed with her grandniece on her knee.

She is a very concerned step mother to her husband’s son and daughter – Cole and Ella -who call her Momala.

Kamala Harris is said to be a Baptist with faith that traces back to Martin Luther King Jr and Gandhi. Her mother would have been a Hindu and her father is an Anglican Christian. Her husband probably follows the Jewish faith.

Shyamala and her husband were followers of Martin Luther King Jr and would probably have joined the march in Washington DC on August 28, 1963 where King made his ‘I have a dream’ speech. Recorded is the family story of Kamala being wheeled in her stroller while her parents marched for civil rights in Berkeley where the mother asked her daughter what she was shouting for. Prompt came the answer from the toddler: “Fee-dom.” The two girls staged their own protest in front of their Montreal apartment building when Kamala was 13 against the banning of children from playing on the lawn. The owners reversed this policy.

Kamala has named her favourite books as Native Son by Richard Wright, The Kite Runner – Khaled Hosseini, The Joy Luck Club –Amy Tan, Song of Solomon – Tony Morrison and C S Lewis’ The Lion, the Witch and the Wardrobe.

She is an author herself, having published in 2009 Smart on Crime: a Career Prosecutor’s Plan to Make Us Safer, focusing on criminal justice reform. Prior to her 2019 presidential campaign, she published The Truths We Hold: an American Journey. The same year she also released an illustrated children’s book: Super Heroes are Everywhere.

Proving she is clever, ambitious, focused, level headed, politically very savvy, even with a tint of guile, she has shown herself to be a remarkable woman. She is 59 years in age, but looks much younger, perhaps due to her always seeming happy – smiling and laughing. She definitely is a people person, seems to forge good rapport with others. She has been drawing huge crowds to her campaign rallies, many coloured, and has risen in popularity polls remarkably, so also in her standing against Trump. It is said the Biden rallies were latterly sans liveliness and audience support. Not so Kamala’s, reported to be lively.

She has many firsts to her credit: first woman District Attorney in San Francisco from 2004 to 2010 and additionally first African South Asian American woman to hold that post. Same with being the first woman to serve as California’s Attorney General, 2011 to 2017. She served as US Senator from California 2017- 2021when her husband gave us his practice in California to accompany her to Washington DC. Then her record breaking – first coloured woman to be Vice President, a position she held since 2021. We hope she will crown herself and share the honour with other women by being elected the first woman President of the USA.

Browsing Internet, I gathered info on two relationships Kamala had before marriage to Emhoff. In 1994, she began a romantic relationship with California politician Willie Brown, who at that time was the first African American Speaker of the California State Assembly. His marriage was off by 1982 though the couple were still to divorce. He was the longest serving speaker (1980 -95) and when no further term was allowed, became mayor of San Francisco, 1996-2004.

The age gap between the black Speaker and aspiring attorney general Kamala Harris was large – 30 years. The romance drew public attention when Brown named Harris to a state medical board paying her a huge salary. Hence the claim that Harris launched her career by having an affair with a married man. The relationship ended in 1996. A comment I would make is that since it was an extra marital affair for Brown, gossip would have ensued and though Kamala was capable in her own right of holding high posts, people would naturally slander her. There is doubt here; it would have been a purely private affair or Harris may have not minded capitalizing on the affair to advance her political career. He may have helped to advance her as she was truly capable. Ambition certainly is in her make-up.

In her second relationship, the claim was made that she was a ‘side piece’ to TV host Montel Williams. Their relationship which could have been nothing more than friendship lasting just one year – 2001 – came under the gossip microscope since a clip appeared showing Kamala and Montel holding hands while he held another woman’s hand, This woman was later identified as his daughter. The truth here is that if you are visible in show business or politics, you live in a glass house and the media, particularly, snoops on you, maliciously.

Kamala married Doug Emhoff in August 2014 after they met on a blind date. There obviously is firm commitment between the two: he – “The love of my life” and she – “It was love at first sight.” He took leave of absence from his partnership in a LA entertainment law firm – DLA Piper – to accompany her to Washington DC to become ‘Second Gentleman’. Now probably he will have to extend his leave or give up his partnership because his wife may become the President of the United States of America and he the First Gentleman.

JRJ encapsulates his autobiography in a 1992 post retirement book

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.