Sri Lanka to invite international bids later this month

Colombo, August 15 (Daily Mirror) - Sri Lanka will finally invite bids from international companies later this month for upstream petroleum development- exploration and extraction of gas and oil- in four blocks of the Mannar basin, Daily Mirror learns.

The move, which was in the planning stage for a long time, did not materialise because of a court case. However, Daily Mirror learns from a reliable source that all the legal impediments had been cleared at the moment to press ahead with tender calling.

The government earlier invited tenders to select a consultancy firm with expertise to manage the international bidding process for upstream petroleum development.

According to a 2021 press release issued by the Parliamentary Media Unit, oil and gas resources valued at around US$267 billion are available in the Mannar Basin. Four blocks in the Mannar Basin will be opened for development. Cairn Lanka Limited, a subsidiary of an Indian firm, drilled two exploration wells in the Mannar Basin in 2011 and discovered natural gas in the Barracuda and Dorado fields.

Sri Lanka gazetted a national policy on natural gas in September 2020, outlining strategies to create domestic demand and providing operators with options to commercialise offshore gas. In addition, the Petroleum Resources Act No. 21 of 2021 was introduced to regulate exploration and production activities.

In the wake of tension in the West Asian region, the countries in South and Southeast Asia have sought to invest in offshore oil exploration.

The Indian Union Cabinet also approved the National Offshore Exploration Scheme, known as Samudra Manthan, with a total allocated budget of $8.83b through the financial year 2030–31.

The decision, taken in a meeting chaired by Prime Minister Narendra Modi, marks the beginning of a government-backed programme aiming to expand oil and gas exploration in India’s offshore areas.

Earlier, Bangladesh also invited bids from international companies to explore oil and gas reserves.