DIMO strengthens regional growth with new DIMO CAREHUB in Marawila, Puttalam District

DIMO, the diversified conglomerate in Sri Lanka, recently opened its latest DIMO CAREHUB located at Chilaw Road, Horagolla, Marawila, in Puttalam District. The company’s dedication to strengthening the North Western Province’s economy and improving community access to top-notch services and solutions is demonstrated by this strategic expansion.

Located in Sri Lanka’s west coast between Negombo and Chilaw, the new DIMO CAREHUB in Marawila is well-poised to play a significant role in the development of the area and support the expansion of the local economy by providing local communities and companies with a wide choice of automotive, agricultural, and household solutions.

DIMO Automotive Engineering Solutions Chief Operating Officer Mahesh Karunaratne stated, “The goal of this strategic expansion is to strengthen communities in Marawila and the neighbouring regions. By providing access to cutting-edge mobility, agricultural solutions and home appliances, we are fuelling the dreams and aspirations of the people in this region.”

As the authorised general distributor for TATA vehicles in Sri Lanka, DIMO, with this newly opened DIMO CAREHUB in Marawila, will provide vehicle sales, TATA genuine spare parts, and a comprehensive range of aftersales services, including lubrication, running repairs, engine and component repairs, as well as interior and exterior cleaning. TATA customers in the area will enjoy an enhanced experience, as these services ensure all their needs are met in one convenient location.

The DIMO CAREHUB is equipped with highly qualified technicians and cutting-edge facilities to provide outstanding after-sales care for TATA vehicles while meeting the requirements of the manufacturer. DIMO’s meticulous selection of highly skilled specialists, who ensure the highest standards are upheld for all customers, demonstrates its commitment to providing exceptional service.

The newly opened CAREHUB will provide agri machinery solutions, such as tractors and harvesters, in addition to services for TATA vehicles. This DIMO CAREHUB reaffirms DIMO’s customer-centric approach which guarantees that the local community receives unparalleled convenience.

The DIMO CAREHUB in Marawilia will also provide a variety of world-class goods and services, such as Michelin, Kumho, Sailun, and MRF tires. High-quality products such as DIMO LUMIN bulbs, lights and switches, Black + Decker household appliances, and WD-40 items will also be available to customers. By introducing local communities to the newest worldwide developments, this extensive array of offerings will contribute to enhancing the standard of living of the communities in the region.

The DIMO CAREHUB demonstrates DIMO’s dedication to improving the quality of life in the area, expanding access to high-quality solutions for a larger clientele, and boosting the local economy.