Eye-opener for local artistes

A recent news item, ‘Govt. to host foreign artistes, Sigiriya fashion show to promote tourism’, has got several of our performers wondering whether this is going to affect the local music industry.

The news item goes on to say that Sri Lanka plans to bring down international artistes and hold water festivals to boost tourists.

Chalaka Gajabahu, Chairman, Sri Lanka Tourism Promotion Bureau, is quoted as having said: “We will be hosting a few international artistes in September to December. We will also be having a fashion show in Sigiriya”.

I would say this is a good idea, indeed, to work on pojects, in order to boost tourism.

However, wouldn’t it be an added attraction to see some of our local artistes, too, involved in this scene!

I’m sure tourists would love to taste the local flavour, as well, where music is concerned.

The SL Western Musicians’ Association needs to step in and ascertain, from the authorities concerned, whether this can be worked out…for the

Nevertheless, of late, there seems to be an influx of foreign performers, especially DJs, and one wonders as to who gave them the green-light to perform here?

The story going around is that these foreigners are here on tourist/visit visas and are, therefore, breaking all the rules by performing here, and should be taken to task by the authorities concerned.

Even if they are here for a one-off performance, they should obtain the necessary clearance from the Immigration and Emigration Department.

This should also apply to Sri Lankan artistes, now domiciled abroad, who come here on passports of their adopted homeland.

What is disturbing is that these Sri Lankans, who have migrated, come here, on a regular basis, as performers, and have the audacity to say that they have no work, in their adopted homeland, and therefore need to come to Sri Lanka to earn…for their livelihood.

Knowledgeable sources say that those who feature such performers should also be penalised. And that’s the setup abroad.

Australia, the UK, the USA, and a host of other countries, taboo foreign artistes performing in their part of the world without proper documentation, and if they are caught breaking the rules, they are deported.

Certain Sri Lankan performers have had to face the music for travelling on tourist/visit visas and performing abroad.

Local artistes say they are not in favour of having foreigners performing here, without authorisation, and depriving them of work.

They were all of the opinion that the local Western Musicians’ Association should step in and RIGHT all the wrongs that are currently happening in the local music industry.

“If this is not done now it’s going to be a disaster for the western musicians in the scene here”, said a senior musician.

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.