Astrologer’s fate

Politics is full of unexpected twists and turns. No sooner had newly elected Tamil Nadu Chief Minister Joseph Vijay punched above his weight to win a crucial trust vote in the Tamil Nadu Legislative Assembly to consolidate his power than he had to roll back the appointment of an astrologer as an Officer on Special Duty (OSD) due to protests. One of the first few things Vijay did after being sworn in as Chief Minister was to appoint famous astrologer Radhan Pandit Vettrivel, as an OSD. It has been reported that Vettrivel predicted Vijay’s electoral victory, and on his counsel Vijay rescheduled his oath-taking ceremony. The new Chief Minister had to give in to pressure from his political allies and rivals and make a volte-face; they questioned his wisdom of appointing an astrologer as a top aide when the need was for the new government to “foster a scientific outlook”.

Vijay should consider the removal of Vettrivel as a foretaste of what is to be expected in coalition politics, where the tail tends to wag the dog, so to speak. Perhaps, by taking up the issue of the astrologer’s appointment, and pressuring Vijay to cancel it, the parties that enabled his TVK to secure a working majority have tested their ability to leverage their support for the TVK to influence the new government.

Intense opposition to an astrologer’s appointment to a Chief Minister’s staff in India, of all places, has come as a surprise. Astrologers wield tremendous influence on people and their political leaders in this part of the world despite the advancement of science and technology. Prof. Richard Lachman of the Toronto Metropolitan University, in an article in The Conversation, reproduced on this page today, discusses how AI Chatbots are believed to manipulate us and shape our opinions. He points out that scholars have long argued that “the algorithms used by social networking sites and search engines create filter bubbles, in which we are fed well-crafted text, video and audio content that either reinforces our worldview or exerts influence towards someone else’s.” It can be considered an instance of the creature manipulating the creator. However, in South Asian politics, astrologers are far more influential than AI Chatbots. Astrologer Vettrivel’s list of clients is said to include a number of prominent Indians.

According to media reports, the late Tamil Nadu Chief Minister J. Jayalalithaa was one of Vettrivel’s clients, and they fell out over his wrong prediction that she would not be found guilty in a disproportionate assets case and imprisoned. Astrologers have taken quite a few political leaders for a ride in this country as well. Some of them even let their guard down, believing in astrological predictions only to be killed in terror attacks, and others who took astrologers’ claims seriously even advanced elections and suffered humiliating defeats. An astrologer was appointed as a director of a state bank. Strangely, there were no protests though the astrologer’s plum job was a sinecure. Time was when Sri Lankans did as governments said; the governments did as the Presidents said, and the Presidents did as astrologers said.

Why Vijay’s allies and rivals have opposed the astrologer’s appointment at issue is not clear. Do they genuinely believe that the new Tamil Nadu government should promote science at the expense of pseudoscience and occult practices involving divination, or did their protests emanate from political and personal rivalries? Whatever the reason, astrologers are facing formidable challenges in this day and age, with a resurgence of global interest in space exploration and new scientific inventions and discoveries. While astrology is focused on interpreting the positions of the celestial bodies within the solar system, astronomy is examining the Milky Way and beyond. A new scientific research has proposed a striking alternative to the long-held scientific belief that a supermassive black hole lies at the centre of the Milky Way, but according to some researchers, the mysterious object may be an ultra-dense concentration of dark matter rather than a black hole. Scientists have long argued that there could be a ninth planet in the solar system, orbiting the sun at a huge distance.

There are several key factors that pose existential challenges to astrology. Some of them are rapid advances in the field of AI, the growth of the Internet with increasing access to information and scientific knowledge, the emergence of a digitally native generation, and the spread of scientific reasoning through modern education.

As for the political brouhaha in Tamil Nadu, the question is why Vettrivel, described as a competent astrologer, could not foresee political trouble for him and his master, Vijay, over his controversial appointment and did not decline the sinecure, when it was offered, without waiting to be removed unceremoniously.

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.