Revitalising universities

President Anura Kumara Dissanayake has reportedly asked the Federation of University Teachers’ Associations (FUTA) to formulate a comprehensive plan to eliminate delays in universities and streamline the higher education sector. He made this request when he met a group of FUTA representatives on Monday, according to media reports.

State universities have come to be characterised by various delays, which are multifactorial. The pace at which they operate reminds us of an Aluth Avurudu cycling competition, where the slowest competitor is adjudged the winner. Cyclists are seen struggling to move at the slowest possible pace. The state universities apparently do something similar in completing their academic programmes.

Most delays affecting national universities are mainly due to disruptions caused by student unions affiliated either to the JVP or to its breakaway group, the FSP. They have subjugated the interests of the university community to the agendas of their political parties. One may recall that in the late 1980s, the JVP had universities closed for months on end. It coined a pithy slogan to mobilise students in universities, technical colleges and schools—palamuwa mawbima dewanuwa igenuma (Motherland First: Education Second). The JVP student union scribbled on university buildings the slogan,“Palamuwa mawbima devanuwa upadiya” (Motherland first: Degree second). Not even primary schools were spared. Small children were forcibly taken out and made to protest. They were ordered to shout, “Palath Saba apita epa” (We don’t need Provincial Councils) but unable to pronounce Palath Saba, the young learners said, “Palababa apita epa” (meaning ‘We don’t need green leaves babies’). Provincial Councillors have since been derisively called ‘Pala Babas’. The reason given by the JVP for disrupting educational institutions was that ‘Indian expansionism’, the 13th Amendment to the Constitution, the devolution of power and the establishment of the Provincial Councils had to be defeated at any cost. Students were among the thousands of people brutally murdered by the JVP for expressing dissent.

Ironically, today, the JVP denies that it ever campaigned against Indian expansionism or conducted a special lecture thereon for its new recruits in the late 1980s. It must apologise to the families of the traders whom it murdered for selling ‘Bombay onions’ and even Indian pharmaceuticals and pay compensation to them. Today, the JVP has got an opportunity to abolish the Provincial Councils, which it tried to scuttle in the 1980s through violence, but in vain. Instead, it has opted to retain them and delay elections to them. Its abortive insurrection debilitated the university system beyond measure.

If the NPP government is really keen to do away with delays in universities, first of all, it ought to put its own house in order by reining in its student activists who use coercion to advance its political agenda at the expense of other students who are a silent majority.

Meanwhile, there has been a sensible proposal that the number of years of schooling be reduced by one and the GCE A/L examination be held earlier to enable students to enter university when they turn 18. Several respected educationists and academics have discussed this issue extensively and made valuable proposals, and those who have undertaken to reform the education sector should take the views of those experts on board. In an article we published on 16 Feb., 2021, Prof. O. A. Ileperuma commented on this problem. He said: “Recent articles by the GMOA (The Island 26-1-2021) and Dr. B. C. Perera (The Island 27-1-2021) highlighted the extraordinary delays causing young doctors to commence their internships at a relatively advanced age of around 28-30 years. Dr. Perera became a consultant at the age of 30, which is now the average age for a starting intern.

I am of the same vintage as Dr. Perera in a different field, and I became an assistant lecturer at the University of Peradeniya at the age of 22 years. That enabled me to serve the university for a record 44 years, which is unimaginable for the junior lecturers joining the university staff today.” Prof. Illeperuma made three proposals: 1. Lower the school starting age from the present five years to four years. The UK practises this system and in France it was lowered to three years. 2. Reduce school years from the current 13 years to 12 years, as was the case previously. 3. Commence GCE (A/L) immediately after the GCE (O/L) without making students waste about a year till the results are out.

If this proposal is carried out, with the disruptive elements among undergraduates being kept on a tight leash, and action taken to redress the grievances of university teachers, non-academic workers and students, it may be possible to ensure that the age of graduation is lowered and universities function smoothly, free from delays.

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.