Buddhism, Spirituality and Science

The teachings of Gautama must be viewed against the background of pre-existing traditions of Hinduism, the religion to which Gautama himself was born. His philosophy could be seen as a form of protestant revolt against the tenets of orthodox Hinduism. Yet, certain basic Hindu concepts were taken over essentially unchanged, for instance the doctrine of Karma, the inexorable law of cause and effect whereby actions in our present life are thought to have consequences in future reincarnations. Another ancient Hindu concept was the belief that the world abounds in ignorance and misery from which the wise and the pious should endeavour to escape.

Where Gautama differed in a fundamental way from Hindu ascetics of old, however, was the manner in which he sought salvation. His own experience had led him to conclude that excessive self-denial such as fasting practised by Hindu ascetics was futile in furthering this cause. Gautama advocated the so-called ‘Middle Path’, the path that lies between austere asceticism on the one hand and extreme self-indulgence on the other. Furthermore, revolting against long-established Hindu traditions, he rejected the caste system, asserting that all human beings are equal in their potential to accomplish salvation.

Gautama’s first sermon at Varanasi embodies two fundamental pronouncements of Buddhist philosophy: The Four Noble Truths, and alongside it an exposition of the Noble Eightfold Path. The Four Truths are enumerated thus:

(2) The cause of suffering is a craving or attachment for objects of sense

(4) The elimination of craving is achieved by following the Noble Eightfold Path.

The Noble Eightfold Path itself implies an ethical code of conduct and self-discipline summarised as:

The ultimate goal to be achieved in Buddhism is seen as freedom from the cycle of birth and re-birth reaching finally the state known as Nirvana. So much is commonly accepted as the bare essentials of Buddhist philosophy derived most directly from the historical facts relating to Gautama Buddha. The details of practice and the specific interpretations given to scriptures, in relation to subjects such as the Nature of the World, have led to the emergence of a diversity of Buddhist sects.

For 2566 years Buddhism has been a major civilizing influence throughout much of Asia and the Far East. The graceful spires and domes of temples and stupas in Sri Lanka, Burma, Thailand and Japan and the murals and sculpture within them bear impressive testimony to the influence of Buddhism upon the art and architecture of these lands. Two centuries after the death of Gautama Buddha his religion had spread across much of Northern India and had just reached the shores of Sri Lanka. Buddhism was deemed to be the state religion of India during the reign of the great Emperor Asoka from 269-237BC. The Buddhism in India at this time, and that which came to Sri Lanka in the latter half of the third century BC were, in their most pristine forms, the religion as preached by Gautama himself.

The scriptures that expound these original teachings are contained in the Tripitaka (the triple basket), a document that was compiled by Indian monks well before the dawn of the Christian Era. The original version of Buddhism is known as Hinayana Buddhism (Buddhism of the Lesser Vehicle) and it is this version that is preserved almost unchanged in modern Sri Lanka. Buddhist doctrines of a generally similar form are also preserved in Thailand and Burma.

In India, however, the dominance of Buddhism over Hinduism was not destined to last. The original Hinayana form, which concentrated almost entirely on individual salvation and was virtually free of ritual, gradually began to incorporate certain aspects of devotional temple worship associated with Hinduism. Already in the first century AD a group of Buddhist monks began to adopt a new and widened interpretation of the teachings of Gautama Buddha. The emergent form of Indian Buddhism took upon itself the cause of salvation of the entire human race in addition to concern for the individual. Because of this wider scope it came to be called Mahayana Buddhism (the Buddhism of the Larger Vehicle).

In general, the Mahayana Buddhist would aspire to the status of ‘bodhisattva’, that is to say one who would eventually become a Buddha. The new Mahayana Buddhism had a more popular appeal and spread rapidly and abroad to Tibet, Korean China and Japan. Whereas Hinayana Buddhism did not change with time in any essential manner in the places where it became established, Mahayana Buddhism on the other hand continued to evolve and take on a diversity of forms. In India, due in large measure to the Islamic invasion, Buddhism was eventually re-absorbed into Hinduism and effectively disappeared as a separate religion around the year AD1300.

Wherever it spread, Buddhism brought with it high moral precepts – tolerance, non-violence, respect tor the individual, love of all nature, a holistic world view and an abiding belief in the equality of all humans.

The liberal tenets of Buddhism are in sharp contrast with the doctrinaire irrationality associated with fundamentalism, in both the Christian and Islamic traditions. Born-again Christians believe in the literal truth of the story of creation, the Earth being less than 6,500 years old. The existence of fossils and their radioactive dating that point to a much greater antiquity of the planet is considered the work of Satan. No amount of rational argument would serve to change this obstinate mode of thought. Nor indeed could the mindset of fundamentalist Muslims be altered by rational argument in regard the atrocities connected with holy wars, jihad or terrorism.

The essence of both Christianity and Islam in their purer forms is a belief in a body of “revealed truth” – God speaking or communicating through the agent of a prophet. Buddhism, however, is markedly different in that its pronouncements are presented to us as an outcome of a process of empiricism. The result of a self-experiment in meditation conducted by none other than the Buddha himself. Indeed in his final words to his disciple Ananda, (Parinibbana sutra) he exhorts us to discover the same truths for ourselves:

Spirituality has different meanings to different people. The Oxford Dictionary defines:

“spiritual adj. Of spirit as opposed to matter; of the soul esp.; as acted upon by God….”

Traditionally, theistic religions have regarded spirituality as an integral aspect of religious experience. Many people still tend to equate spirituality with religion, but a declining participation in organized religions and the rapid growth of secularism has led to a broader, more liberal view of spirituality.

Spirituality in its most liberal sense carries connotations of a ‘spiritual aesthetic outlook’ which is more individualistic and less structured than the spirituality of the doctrinal faiths of organized religions. The latter often posits the existence a spirit or spirits as evidence of a divine or god-related entity. At one end of the spectrum, even some atheists regard themselves as spiritual, defining “spiritual” as nurturing thoughts and emotions that are in harmony with a belief that the entire universe is, in some way, connected by the flux of cause and effect at every scale. This in my view would be the most appropriate Buddhist interpretation of spiritualism.

Gautama Buddha’s thoughts about the world are in remarkable accord with discoveries in modern science. In Buddha’s analysis of the mind, for example, modern discoveries in psychology would seem to have been anticipated. More impressively perhaps, in his analysis of the Universe recent developments in astronomy have been similarly anticipated. The Earth as a planet around a sun, the sun a star amongst billions in the galaxy, and the galaxy being one of many billion galaxies are propositions that have striking resonances in Buddhist scripture.

In the Visuddimagga, a treatise on Buddhist philosophy written by Buddhaghosa in Kelaniya Sri Lanka in the 5th century of the common era, it is stated explicitly that:

“… as far as these suns and moon’ s revolve shining and shedding their light in space, so far extends the thousand-fold universe. In it are thousands of suns, thousands of moons thousands of Jambudipas, thousands of Aparagoyanas …”, the latter references being to extraterrestrial abodes of life. The billions of galaxies discovered in modern astronomy could be identified with statements referring to the entire Universe as “… this sphere of a million, million world systems”.

Besides correspondences that exist between Buddhist thought and modern psychology and astronomy, even more impressive agreements with fundamental physics have been noted by many commentators. Buddhist ideas of uncertainty (anitya) and dependent causation have striking counterparts in the physics of matter on the scale of atoms and smaller. A major development in the new physics of quantum mechanics in the 1930’s was the discovery of Heisenberg’s uncertainly principle. Not only can the state of an atomic system be observed only within certain well-defined limits, but between one act of conscious observation and the next, the equations of physics have to be reset taking account of the precise state in which the was actually last observed. It is as though the act of conscious interaction with the external world affects the subsequent flow of events. This interaction between human consciousness and the physical world has been interpreted to mean that consciousness itself is a cosmic quality. Our consciousness being part of a cosmic ocean of consciousness.

Buddhist ideas of dependent causation (paticacasamuppada) have also a resonance with modern thinking about the interconnectedness of all things in the world. Gaia is an idea due to James Lovelock that considers all the components of planet Earth, its oceans, atmosphere, climate and life being all tightly interlocked, as they would be within a single living creature. Disturb one tiny component of this system and the entire system reacts. Accepting this fact is of paramount importance for the well being and the future of our living planet. My own ideas and theories of the cosmic nature of life that are rapidly coming to be accepted implies that we are part of a cosmic chain of being that extends to the remotest corners of the Universe. This again is fully consistent with Buddhism.

Since the modern scientific viewpoint is derived from the application of the methods of empirical science, one might wonder how the same results could be reached without, for instance, access to telescopes 2,554 years ago. The answer must lie in the still mysterious and unproven powers of meditation. lf we are all creatures of the Cosmos would it not seem reasonable that we have an innate knowledge of its nature somewhere deep within ourselves? The basic facts relating to the Cosmos could be viewed as essential components of our own true innermost nature.

The Buddha appears to have been reticent on the question as to whether or not there was an omnipotent God who created the universe. In this respect I would interpret the Buddha’s attitude to be one of agnosticism, distinct from atheism. And agnosticism is in my view is the correct intellectual position to adopt. In neither the Hinayana nor the Mahayana traditions is the Buddha himself seen in any way as a God, or an agent possessing extraordinary creative or omniscient powers. This lack of a central God-figure in Buddhism might be seen as a positive attribute, for men have been known in the past to fight bitterly to defend the gods they believed in. It is quite remarkable that Buddhism has spread across vast tracts of Asia and has maintained itself in many countries without recourse to religious wars or crusades.

Buddhism is a philosophy that enshrines peace, compassion, selflessness and universal love as fundamental virtues. Peace to conquer the world, Enlightenment to dispel ignorance and to understand the true nature of the Universe. What better philosophy could there be in the decades that lead us through the 21st century?

(Professor Chandra Wickramasinghe is an internationally renowned astronomer and astrobiologist. He is currently Honorary Professor at the University of Buckingham in the UK and also Honorary Professor at the National Institute of Fundamental Studies and of Ruhuna University in Sri Lanka.)

A case study on the functioning of Govt.and fraudulent school admissions

The Tsunami of 2024 and what followed at the Finance Ministry and overseas

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.