Outspoken Sri Lanka MP Diana Gamage loses seat, Harsha proposes Mujibur

ECONOMYNEXT — Outspoken parliamentarian and State Minister of Tourism stands to lose her seat in parliament following a Supreme Court verdict that she is not eligible to be an MP, according to media reports.

The apex court of the country made the verdict Wednesday May 08 morning when a petition filed against Gamage was taken up for consideration.

The petition was filed by civil activist Oshala Herath, in which he sought a ruling that Gamage was unqualified to serve as a Member of the Sri Lankan Parliament as she is a British citizen.

Gamage entered parliament on the main opposition Samagi Jana Balawegaya (SJB) ticket as a national list MP at the 2020 parliamentary election. She subsequently crossed over to the government of then President Gotabaya Rajapaksa. Following Rajapaksa’s resignation, she has been serving as State Minister of Tourism under President Ranil Wickremesinghe.

SJB MP Harsha de Silva tweeted moments after the news of the court verdict that former SJB MP Mujibur Rahuman his “choice”, indicating the party’s possible preference to have Rahuman replace Gamage. Rahuman resigned last year to contest the local government election which has been indefinitely postponed.

Gamage has clashed with SJB and other opposition MPs in parliament over a number of issues, and the SJB has been especially sensitive to her remarks about the ownership of the party.

The MP has also been a vocal proponent of facilitating more night life activities in Colombo and in other tourist hot spots and has spoken in favour of decriminalising the cultivation of cannabis for export. She has spoken in favour of regulating sex work.

“When there is a demand, there is a supply. The demand will remain until the supply is there. If we can’t stop this, what we have to do is, we have to bring regulations for this because this is unhealthy for the people of this country. Not only that, we need to consider the health of the people who are providing services,” she said at a recent press conference. (Colombo/May08/2024)