Adani charged in US over renewable energy bribery amid Sri Lanka troubles

ECONOMYNEXT – India’s Adani group has been charged alleging 250 million dollars in bribes to get solar energy contracts from Indian authorities and misleading investors when capital was raised from American investors, the US Securities Exchange and media reports said.

Chairman Gautam Adani, two executives of Adani Green Energy Limited, his nephew Sagar Adani and Vneet Jaain are charged with misleading U S and international investors about their company’s compliance with antibribery and anticorruption practices, CNBC, a US business news channel reported.

Sri Lankan activists have also taken a project by Adani Green Energy in Mannar area to court, after it won a wind power deal from the island’s government without competitive tender at allegedly far higher prices than other projects with competitive tender.

In Sri Lanka and some other countries renewable firms also evade competitive bidding through a so-called ‘feed in tariffs’ which critics say are produced by lobbying for various costs.

The US case relates to solar energy deals from the Indian government.

Adani and other defendants are accused in the indictment of bribing Indian government officials more than 250 million dollars in bribes to get solar energy supply contracts involving more than 2 billion dollars in profits, CNBC said.

The indictment in the US District Court in Brooklyn also charged Ranjit Gupta and Rupesh Agarwal, former executives Azure Power Global, a renewable energy firm.

Cyril Cabanes, Saurabh Agarwal and Deepak Malhotra, three former employees of the Canadian institutional investor were also charged.

The US Securities and Exchange Commission said “Gautam and Sagar Adani orchestrated a bribery scheme that involved paying or promising to pay the equivalent of hundreds of millions of dollars in bribes to Indian government officials to secure their commitment to purchase energy at above-market rates that would benefit Adani green and Azure Power.”

Gautam and Sagar Adani were engaged in the bribery scheme during a September 2021 note offering by Adani Green that raised 750 million dollars including approximately 175 million dollars from U.S. investors.

“The Adani Green offering materials included statements about its anti-corruption and anti-bribery efforts that were materially false or misleading in light of Gautam and Sagar Adani’s conduct,” the SEC said.

The indictment alleges that Adani group sought to “obtain and finance massive state energy supply contracts through corruption and fraud at the expense of U.S. investors,” Deputy Assistant Attorney General Lisa Miller was quoted as saying by PBS, a public broadcasting service.