Keells Nexus introduces an all new Loyalty App

Keells is set to usher a new chapter in customer experience with the relaunch of Keells Nexus with the introduction of its all-new loyalty app on 13th February. For 25 years, Keells Nexus has been at the heart of Sri Lankan retail, pioneering coalition loyalty and even introducing mobile-based loyalty as early as 2014. The loyalty program is building on this legacy, combining state-of-the-art technology with richer, more personalized rewards and seamless integration across the Keells ecosystem with an intuitive mobile experience.

Today, Keells Nexus stands at over 2 million registered members, a reflection of the trust customers place in Keells and the brand’s commitment to improving the quality of life for the nation. The launch further strengthens Keells’ long-standing focus on tech-enabled retail efficiency, following innovative retail experiences to customers such as self-checkout counters and retail technology that drives efficiency such as advanced inventory management systems.

The new app therefore is the next logical step in this journey, bringing together rewards, offers, and account visibility in one intuitive, streamlined interface. The new Keells Nexus app brings together all deals, savings and partner offers in one place, giving customers complete visibility and control. Members can track their points in real time, scan a QR code at checkout to earn rewards instantly, and enjoy a more personalised, more connected shopping experience.

“At the heart of Keells Nexus is a simple but powerful belief that life is better when we’re connected,” said Nilusha Fernando Head of Marketing, Keells Supermarkets & Senior Vice President, John Keells Group.

First Capital Holdings records Rs. 3.23Bn Total Comprehensive Income for 9M FY2025/26

IDL, Clouds by SOZO and the Rukmini Tissanayagam Trust partner with the HSBC Ceylon Literary & Arts Festival 2026

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.