Huawei launches 5G-AA solutions for mobile AI era

Huawei Vice President and Huawei Wireless Solution President Cao Ming, launching 5G-AA 10 solutions

At the Global Mobile Broadband Forum 2024 (MBBF 2024), Huawei Vice President and Huawei Wireless Solution President Cao Ming, launched 5G-AA solutions. Cao said, “Mobile AI is changing our lives. The arising new connections and services pose increasingly higher requirements on networks. Huawei’s 5G-AA 10 solutions build multidimensional ultimate network capabilities through the full-series Advanced Radio, enable full-domain site digitalisation through Ambient Site, and achieve L4 network autonomy through the Agent-based digital engineers’ team. With such excellent performance, these solutions will help operators meet the ever-diversifying demand for services in the mobile AI era.”

Huawei’s 5G-AA solutions will deepen the convergence of 5.5G and AI through ‘Networks for AI’ and ‘AI for Networks’. Networks for AI will enable networks to possess the sufficient capabilities that are required to address differentiated service requirements and improve both network performance and user experiences. AI for Networks will equip networks with L4 autonomy through digital sites and RAN agents. Operators can use these solutions in a wide range of scenarios to sustain their leading positions.

“Mobile AI is on the horizon. We will continue to work with all industry partners and innovate to promote the integration of 5.5G and AI,” concluded Cao.

The 15th Global Mobile Broadband Forum, with the tagline ‘5.5G Leads mobile AI era,’ was held from 30 to 31 October in Istanbul, Türkiye. It was hosted by Huawei with support from industry partners GSMA and GTI. The industry’s latest advancements were shared, and new opportunities were explored with the participation of operators, vertical industry leaders, and ecosystem partners. The achievement of 5.5G business success in the mobile AI era was discussed by industry stakeholders, and the success of 5G was leveraged to attain even greater achievements with 5.5G.