Rain to ease, but flood risks remain in several areas: Met Dept.

The prevailing rainy conditions are expected to ease from today, but several hill country and Sabaragamuwa areas will continue to face rainfall risks due to weather systems influencing the region, the Department of Meteorology said.

As of yesterday, nearly 2,331 people from 581 families were impacted by the inclement weather with four deaths also reported.

Director General of the Department of Meteorology Ajith Wijemanne yesterday said Kandy, Nuwara Eliya, the Sabaragamuwa Province and parts of the Western Province are expected to receive showers today.

He said rainfall could continue in Kandy and Nuwara Eliya districts and the Sabaragamuwa Province even after 6 August due to the influence of a typhoon over the Pacific Ocean south of Japan.

The Department of Meteorology said heavy rainfall exceeding 100 mm is likely at some locations in the Sabaragamuwa Province and the Kandy and Nuwara Eliya districts. Showers or thundershowers are expected at times in the Western, Sabaragamuwa and North-Western provinces, as well as Kandy, Nuwara Eliya, Galle and Matara districts.

Meanwhile, the Irrigation Department has issued a major flood warning for low-lying areas of the Kelani River Valley, warning that a major flood situation could develop due to heavy rainfall in the upper and middle catchment areas.

Residents in low-lying areas of Dehiowita, Ruwanwella and Yatiyanthota Divisional Secretariat Divisions have been advised to remain vigilant as river levels could rise rapidly.

A minor flood warning has also been issued for low-lying floodplain areas of the Kalu River covering Pelmadulla, Nivithigala, Ratnapura, Kuruwita, Ayagama and Elapatha Divisional Secretariat Divisions.

The Sri Lanka Mahaweli Authority yesterday begun opening spill gates and the mud sluice of the Gamini Dissanayake Reservoir in Kotmale from Monday afternoon due to rising inflows from the upper catchment areas.

The Authority said approximately 250 cubic metres of water per second will be released into the Kotmale Oya, with the volume subject to change depending on reservoir inflows.

Residents in low-lying areas along the Kotmale Oya, including Nugawela, Riverside, Mawathura, and areas along the Mahaweli River from Ulapane to Gampola, Weligalla, Gelioya, Peradeniya, Katugastota and Polgolla, have been urged to take precautions.

The Department of Meteorology also warned of strong winds of around 40–50 kmph at times in the North Central, Sabaragamuwa, Southern, Central and North-Western provinces and the Trincomalee District.

Amid the adverse weather conditions, Government schools in Kandy and Nuwara Eliya districts will remain closed today to ensure the safety of students and teachers.

Director General Wijemanne said there is limited likelihood of the ongoing adverse weather affecting the upcoming G.C.E. Advanced Level and Grade Five Scholarship examinations. A discussion with education authorities is scheduled for 5 August to review weather-related concerns.