SJB reaffirms commitment to Easter Attack justice after doubts raised

Accuses Rienzie Arsecularatne PC of amplifying remarks by Prof. Agalakada Sirisumana Thera that have no bearing on party’s stance

Reaffirms that SJB leader Sajith Premadasa’s promises, both written and verbal, to the Archbishop would not change

Condemns Arsecularatne’s letter, accusing it of being politically motivated and aimed at damaging SJB’s voter base

The Samagi Jana Balawegaya (SJB), through its General Secretary Ranjith Madduma Bandara, yesterday reiterated the party’s and its leader Sajith Premadasa’s unwavering commitment to ensuring justice for the victims of the 2019 Easter Sunday attacks.

This reassurance follows a letter by President’s Counsel Rienzie Arsecularatne to Archbishop of Colombo Malcolm Cardinal Ranjith, which cast doubts on Premadasa’s dedication to this cause.

Arsecularatne’s letter gained widespread media attention after he referenced a statement by Professor Agalakada Sirisumana Thera, a petitioner in the ongoing case against the Inspector General of Police Deshabandu Tennekoon, which seemed to question SJB’s commitment to justice for the victims.

In response, Madduma Bandara accused Arsecularatne of amplifying remarks that have no bearing on the party’s stance. He reaffirmed that Premadasa’s promises, both written and verbal, to the Archbishop and the victims’ families would not change. “The SJB remains steadfast in its call for an unbiased investigation conducted according to international standards, to ensure those responsible for the attacks are held accountable,” he said.

Madduma Bandara also highlighted the party’s track record on the matter, noting that the SJB facilitated two Parliamentary debates on the Easter attacks, revealing all available information to the public. Additionally, SJB lawyers had submitted proposals on how future investigations should proceed, with Premadasa’s commitment to justice explicitly outlined in his election manifesto.

The SJB condemned Arsecularatne’s letter, accusing it of being politically motivated and aimed at damaging the party’s voter base. The letter, they claimed, was also an attempt to disrupt religious harmony in the country. Madduma Bandara criticised the National People’s Power (NPP) for not actively addressing the Easter attack investigation and for remaining silent on the appointment of Tennekoon

Madduma Bandara also accused online media outlets aligned with the NPP of spreading a report that falsely claimed the Archbishop had expressed doubts about Premadasa’s commitment to delivering justice for the Easter attacks. However, despite the SJB’s assertion, the news reports in question only referenced Arsecularatne’s letter and did not attribute any such statement to the Archbishop.