More on Premadasa years: pro-poor policies, garment factories, Janasaviya and housing

Premadasa then unleashed his prodigious energy to make dramatic changes in the country’s economy. He looked on economic development as a part of his bigger vision to ensure “growth with equity”. While the JRJ administration followed a classical pattern of investment fueled by urbanization which made the GDP of Western province much higher than that of the outlier provinces, Premadasa was a proponent of the concept of all round growth as a way of catering to the poorer segments of society.

I remember studying some World Bank reports with Wickreme Weerasooria, who was the Secretary of the Planning Ministry, which drew attention to the abysmal poverty of the estate population and the people of Hambantota, Monaragala and Mannar in relation to the poverty levels prevalent in the other districts. Accordingly rural development projects were launched with Norwegian aid in the Hambantota, Monaragala and Mannar districts, but that was insufficient to make a dent on the problems there. It was Premadasa who had the vision to undertake poverty alleviation urgently and devote his proverbial energy to obtain dramatic results. His approach was three pronged; Janasaviya, the 300 garment factory programme and meaningful administrative reforms at village level. All three have stood the test of time and marks a change in the rural landscape.

JRJ pioneered the setting up of investment zones under the Greater Colombo Economic Commission (GCEC which later became the Board of Investments or BOI) on the basis of “plug and play” manufacturing, beginning with the Katunayake Free Trade Zone [FTZ]. He introduced the concept of value addition to an economy which was based on export of unprocessed agricultural commodities namely tea, coconut, rubber and cinnamon.

The global economy was undergoing change with production being outsourced to select developing countries. That was much cheaper than producing them at home in the west. Hong Kong and Singapore were the trendsetters of this transformation by manufacturing light industrial products with their easy credit, reliable freight business, cheap labour, work ethic and good links to the markets of rich countries.

Among these products was garments which saw increasing demand in the west with its growing prosperity and emergence of a large middle class within a consumer society. Premadasa deserves credit for immediately recognizing the potential of this trend to further his target of “growth with equity”. As regards the genesis of this all important industry in Sri Lanka, I was told that Premadasa on a visit to Hong Kong was entertained by a Muslim gem merchant who lived there coordinating the sales of gems from his family company. This gem merchant had given Premadasa a tour of the business district and the manufacturing zone of sweated trades, especially the garment factories in Kowloon.

Premadasa immediately saw the potential of this industry and persuaded some of his friends in the local tailoring establishment to enter the garment manufacturing business. Another fortuitous circumstance helped in making this move an instant success. The garment industry worked on the basis of “quotas” allocated by the buyers. The Hong Kong quotas were already full and it took little to persuade some big foreign manufacturers to relocate in Sri Lanka and utilize the quotas that were granted to us.

In fact it is said that at first many foreign exporters only changed their labels to say “Made in Sri Lanka” and shipped their products from their Hong Kong factories to Europe and the US. But this could not go on for long and they soon relocated here and set up factories in our FTZs and outside. This project was personally driven by the President and the facilities like allocation of land, electricity, water and banking facilities were provided in record time which led to favourable responses from large scale buyers like Marks and Spencer and Walmart. This in turn led to the ambitious 300 garment factory program which revolutionized garment manufacturing in South Asia.

The President insisted on locating factories in the hinterland and employing rural .women. This was probably the best attempt to develop our rural areas and also empower women in a practical attempt at poverty alleviation. After decades of”handouts”, which were crippling rural initiatives, new garment industries brought prosperity to distant villages. “The quota system” was adjusted to give more orders to factories in the periphery as against lower allocations for the big cities. Even critics were constrained to admit that standards of living among rural women had improved.

The President gleefully spoke of the jewelry shops that were springing up near the factories and the small gold chains on the necks of working girls who had never before possessed anything of value. These developments drew the envy of rival politicians who wished that they, had first thought of this idea. Lalith Athulathmudali said sarcastically that “our girls are forced to stitch “Jangi” [underwear] for white women” forgetting the fact that his own electorate Ratmalana was the centre of the countries “rag trade” and that this trade was, for the first time, providing employment to a large swathe of semi urban women who had earlier been helpless, unemployed and brutalized.

Like the garment factories another innovation of the President was the poverty amelioration program named Janasaviya. Conceptualized by a group of his officials, Janasaviya was aimed at providing basic food support to families below the poverty line. Recipients were selected at public sittings and time was given for objections since the local bureaucracy was notoriously corrupt and could be influenced to leave out the deserving and include those with power. Even so the criticism was made that selections were biased in favour of the party in power.

It was one of the earliest attempts at poverty reduction and was taken as a model by many developing countries. Janasaviya, unlike its heavily politicized successors under the SLFP, envisaged the recipients donating their labour for community development projects in the relevant villages. The construction and maintenance of public works was entrusted to Janasaviya recipients because many studies had shown that a village labour force was capable of generating productivity as a basic input in rural development.

Recipients were expected to donate their labour on village works for three days a week in exchange for a basket of goods. During this period the utility of “Shramadana” as a practical economic resource in developing countries was promoted by Gandhian development theorists, including the Sarvodaya Movement in Sri Lanka. However Premadasa engaged himself in an epic confrontation with AT Ariyaratne, the leader of the local Sarvodaya movement. Since I was a friend of Ariyaratne, having helped him to overcome the hostility of Felix Bandaranaike during the Sirimavo regime, I became privy to the reasons for the enemity of these two stalwarts of village development.

Partly due to the link up with the Friedrich Neumann Foundation of Germany that I facilitated, Sarvodaya became rich and began to branch out to ventures designed to ensure its sustainability. Among these ventures was the setting up of a well equipped printing press which was located in Ratmalana. It boasted of the latest German printing technology and Ariyaratne’s rather permissive management style was replaced by a profit oriented trained printer who oversaw this venture. One far reaching decision was to undertake the printing of the “Ravaya” newspaper which had transformed itself from a tabloid to a broadsheet in keeping with its growing popularity.

Ravaya was a progressive newspaper usually critical of the government and was edited by Victor Ivan – a former JVP leader who had been imprisoned after the failure of the 1971 insurrection. He had joined the LSSP after his release but was better known as a lucid writer, defender of human rights and generally an anti-establishment figure. When he began to criticize the Premadasa administration and its leader he put himself on the cross-hairs of the new President’s ire. He blamed Ariyaratne for printing Ravaya in his press and broke off the friendship he had enjoyed with the Sarvodaya chief when he was in the opposition.

To make matters worse Ravaya promoted Lalith and Gamini in their conflict with Premadasa and encouraged internal criticism of the Presidents authoritarian ways. But the main reason for the Premadasa-Ariyaratne conflict was the “inside information” that was leaked to the former during the Presidential election. The secret was that the Sarvodaya Press was printing posters for Mrs. B – which her rival Premadasa took to be a great betrayal by his erstwhile friend. Ari told me that indeed the poster was printed as alleged but that it was a commercial transaction which had been undertaken by his printing manager without consulting him.

A characteristic of Premadasa was that while he had deep friendships any betrayal by a friend resulted in an unending vendetta. He did not believe in “forgive and forget”. The full force of the President’s fury was then visited on Ariyaratne. Ari told me that he had been earmarked for assassination by the Premadasa mafia and that he had a narrow shave when he was targeted at a meeting in Kegalle. Whether this was true or whether it was only a symptom of a paranoia which seemed to afflict the Sarvodaya chief, I had no way of knowing.

I had read that President Richard Nixon too had a similar unforgiving nature. Nixon maintained an “enemies list” and spent time in harassing them ultimately leading to a “break in” to their offices which set in train a set of events which finally led to his resignation. Premadasa too was alleged to have established the “Lawrence mafia” (Lawrence was a retired DIG loyal to Premadasa) which “tailed” his enemies with a view to eliminating them.

Later on I will narrate the famous “Buultjens abduction” case which was used by Premadasa, ably assisted by Ravi Jayewardene, JRJs son, to engineer the arrest of Gamini Dissanayake on charges of kidnapping as a part of his vendetta with his erstwhile colleague. In an attempt to implicate Lalith and Gamini he set up a Commission of Inquiry on their relations with Israel. On public platforms he subtly suggested that Lalith was an Israeli agent because he had taught law at a University in Jerusalem. The Commission found no evidence of such a complicity though it highlighted the purchase of large caches of Israeli weapons for the Sri Lankan armed forces.

Even as a member of Dudley Senanayake’s cabinet, Premadasa had paid special attention to the problem of housing. As a MP for Colombo Central, where housing is a major problem, he had set about tackling this problem with his usual gusto. In a sense he was competing with his political rival Pieter Keuneman who also, under the Sirimavo administration, concentrated on urban housing. Pieter however, in keeping with his communist ideology, brought legislation to change ownership from urban landlords to long time residents. He also restricted the space of new houses to 2,500 square feet each leading to the construction of smaller houses on smaller extents of land [a minimum of six perches per house] by local architects.

However laudable these objectives may have been it led to a virtual halt to housing construction. Premadasa on the other hand was more realistic and attempted to increase the housing stock. His signature achievement was the development of the Maligawatte housing scheme for which I, and a team from the then Information department undertook the publicity programme under the heading of “a city within a city”. It was hailed by Dudley Senanayake and the UNP, which thanks to Premadasa, earned plaudits as the party of low cost housing.

He also encouraged rural housing under Janasaviya and the new local government structures that he created. Bradman Weerakoon has described how the PM had the “chutzpah” to get housing as a priority of the UN by promoting a resolution calling for a “Year of Housing”. As Bradman says no one could stop him once Premadasa made up his mind.

From the time he became a municipal councilor R. Premadasa was very interested in local government. In his first assignment as a deputy minister he chose the portfolio of local government under minister Tiruchelvam. He once told me that SWRD Bandaranaike could form his own party because he had an island wide network of Mayors, Urban Council Chairmen and local government representatives who could not be bought over by DS Senanayake. This was long before Premadasa himself set up his “Purawesi Peramuna” which could be transformed into a political party if the UNP did not give him his due place.

One reason why he was not enamored of the Indo-Lanka agreement was its emphasis on establishing Provincial Councils. He did not welcome the establishment of a second tier between the centre and the village council or the “Pradeshiya Sabha”. He proposed wide ranging reforms to the existing Gam Sabhawa or Village Council system of local government. He amalgamated the Village Councils in an electorate so that the boundaries of the newly established “Pradeshiya Sabha”would coincide with that of the electorate. This made it possible for greater financial resources to be allocated to that entity.

The management structure was also changed to bring in public officials as administrative secretaries of the Pradeshiya Sabhas. These changes were welcomed as forward looking and capable of promoting rapid growth at village level. Premadasa believed that decentralization of key state powers to the periphery would also defuse the call for more powers to a new entity like Provincial Councils. He feared that some PCs would encourage the “homelands” concept of the TULF.

Today this three tier administrative structure has been criticized as leading to a dysfunctional bureaucratization which is top heavy. It has produced a large number of ignorant local government representatives who are a drain on national resources. The best example of this anarchy is that the Janasaviya programme which was meant to contribute to cheap labour for village works have been superseded by village level councilors who have become small time contractors swallowing up the funds for roads, culverts, bridges etc., with no quality and financial control. Such project funding has led to the corruption which marks local government administration today.

The first few years of the Premadasa regime were a security nightmare. The JVP and its military arm shut down the country at will. However the government fought back amidst many complaints of human rights violations. The security forces employed brutal means to attack the JVP, especially after purported threats to the families of army officers. The JVP politbureau went into hiding but the Ops Combine systematically tracked them down and by 1990 Wijeweera himself was arrested and killed.

But civil society led by journalists associations – many of centre leftist persuasion – carried out a campaign asking for the observation of human rights standards and punishment for those who had blatantly violated them. Many innocent people who were caught in the cross fire between the JVP and the security forces paid with their lives. Left wing tabloids like Yukthiya – which was funded by international NGOs and Ravaya, both edited by ex-JVP combatants, were highly critical of Premadasa and the state apparatus.

While senior SLFPers flirted with the President, younger members like Mangala Samaraweera and Mahinda Rajapaksa spearheaded the formation of a “Mothers Front”. The Opposition preferred to take cover under these organizations rather than confront Premadasa because they themselves were victims of the JVP’s extermination machine. It was an exceptionally trying time and the President whose trait was not to brook any challenge was criticized by the international media and civil society for his intransigence.

Some of his own party members who had lost out in his energetic reorganization of the UNP, were not averse to leaking information to embarrass him. There was, as a result, a siege mentality in the country. The opposition to him among the urban elite grew while the majority of the populace was still in a state of shock due to the unceasing violence and disruptions unleashed by the LTTE and the JVP. The best indication of this transformation of the personality of President Premadasa came in the form of a statement by his secretary Wijedasa who said that “his temperament was much better as Prime Minister than President” [Lankadeepa of August 22, 2023]

All this was to come to a head in an unprecedented Impeachment motion in Parliament and its political consequences which we will describe in the next chapter.

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.