Sri Lanka says foreign research ships allowed to replenish after Chinese protest

ECONOMYNEXT – Sri Lanka will allow offshore research ships for replenishments at the island nation ports despite a one-year ban on such vessels, Foreign Ministry Spokesman said amid strong protest by China over the island nation allowing a German research vessel.

This is the first time Sri Lanka has officially admitted that foreign research vessels will be allowed for replenishments since President Ranil Wickremesinghe’s government imposed a one year ban on offshore research vessels in December last year.

“The ban on foreign ships is for research purposes, not on replenishment”, Niluka Kadurugamuwa, Sri Lanka’s Foreign Ministry Spokesman told EconomyNext.

“There was a German research vessel recently for replenishment and Sri Lanka allowed it.”

Chinese Embassy in Colombo has raised strong protest against the move to allow a German research vessel early this month following the island nation’s authorities turned down a Beijing request for a research vessel in February.

President Wickremesinghe’s government has temporarily halted foreign research ships after strong security concerns raised by neighbour India and the United States following the visit of two Chinese research vessels in 14 months.

Diplomats have told EconomyNext that the strong Chinese protest was also due to Sri Lanka’s ban was implemented after Indian pressure.

When the ban was announced, the government failed to specifically reveal its stance on requests for replenishment or crew change for foreign research vessels.

Sri Lanka is in the process of introducing a SOP (Standard Operation Procedure) for handling foreign research vessels.

Two Chinese research ships were allowed to dock in Sri Lanka ports within 14 months through November with one called for replenishment and the other for research.

Chinese research ship Shi Yan 6 arrived in Sri Lanka in October 2023 and docked in Colombo port, for what Beijing citing was for “geophysical scientific research” in collaboration with the island nation’s National Aquatic Resources Research and Development Agency (NARA).

In August 2022, Chinese navy vessel Yuan Wang 5 docked at Hambantota in southern Sri Lanka for replenishment.

Both drew strong Indian protests citing security concerns in the Indian Ocean.

India uses the Colombo port as its main transshipment hub and accounts for around 70 percent of the total transshipment volume of the port. (Colombo/ March 20/2024