Parliament

Kilinochchi District Hospital: Re-starting women’s treatment centre a priority – Minister

Health and Mass Media Minister Dr. Nalinda Jayatissa told Parliament yesterday (23) that action will be taken to address the existing deficiencies in the Kilinochchi District Hospital as soon as possible.

In response to a question from ruling party MP Rajeevan Jeyachandramoorthy during oral question time, the Minister said that the necessary steps are being taken to once again begin operating the Kilinochchi Hospital’s women’s treatment centre, which was constructed with the help of the Dutch government and has not been functioning for many years.

Jeyachandramoorthy also told the Health Minister that some of the centre’s equipment is outdated.

He said that this matter had been discussed at the last ministerial consultation meeting and at that time, it was also said that action would be taken to engage the officers in rotation in the Northern Province.

The ruling party MP said that the Health Minister and the departmental officials should pay due attention in this regard and take steps to immediately provide staff and begin operating the centre, where women, including pregnant women, in the Kilinochchi and Mullaitivu districts can receive treatment.

In response, Minister Jayatissa said that the Government has focused on the issue presented by the MP and although there are buildings and equipment already available, the staff is not enough to operate the centre.

The Minister said that however, they are training suitable staff for the centre and that as a result, the centre can have the required staff to begin functioning again. He further said that the Government has paid special attention to the Kilinochchi District Hospital and informed that steps will be taken to address the deficiencies there soon.

‘Public transport drivers must obtain PT licences by December 31’

All public transport drivers must obtain ‘PT’ licences by December 31, Transport, Highways, Ports, and Civil Aviation Minister Bimal Rathnayake said in Parliament yesterday.

The Minister said that all necessary facilities will be provided for this purpose and that officers of the flying squad have been instructed to inspect school vehicles, office vehicles and passenger transport buses to prevent accidents.

The Minister said this while responding to questions raised by MP Kader Mastan under Standing order 27/2 in Parliament yesterday.

“Similarly, the court has ordered to provide facilities to people with special needs at all railway stations and bus terminals. We have informed the court of our policy in this regard. Accordingly, all necessary facilities will be provided to people with special needs at railway stations and public places.

Meanwhile, 5.2 million vehicles were tested for emissions in 2020. Through this, the Government has received revenue of Rs. 3.0 billion, the Minister said.

“In 2021, 5.5 million vehicles were tested for emissions. Its total revenue is Rs. 3.2 billion.

“Similarly, in 2022, 5.5 million vehicles were tested for emissions, generating total revenue of Rs 3.3 billion. In 2023, 5.7 million vehicles were tested for emissions, generating total revenue of Rs 4.3 billion. In 2024, 5.799 million vehicles were tested, generating revenue of Rs. 4.8 billion.

“Furthermore, 4,565 military vehicles were tested for emissions in 2024.”

If a NPP Government was not elected, Ice would be sold at the Tangalle public fair by now, NPP MP Najith Indika told Parliament yesterday.

“The issue of the narcotic Ice has arisen in society because drugs are being seized in bulk like never before. Who is behind this?”

“Everything will be revealed in the future. But only one party holds media conferences every time the security authorities seize drugs. It is suspicious as to why everything that is seized relates to the same individual or family,” the MP said.

‘Water Resources Board enables identifying of groundwater potential across the country’

Environment Minister Dhammika Patabendige told Parliament yesterday that the Water Resources Board (WRB) in Sri Lanka formulates groundwater resources evaluation maps to identify and understand groundwater potential across the country.

These maps will be developed by conducting hydro-geological and geophysical investigations using modern equipment and data analysis to delineate potential groundwater sources and inform sustainable management plans for efficient water use and declaring most important river and stream catchment areas as reservations.

These maps are developed using Geographic Information Systems (GIS). Through this, the country’s water resources, including water catchment areas can be identified, and they can be protected and conserved, he said.

“This also hopes to protect the water resources in the river and lake basins.

“The Gangadara Management Unit established within Sri Lanka’s Irrigation Department too focused on this.

“We will be able to identify river reserves as well as stream reserves and protect them,” the Minister said.

‘Govt not prepared to accept any unjust demands of CEB workers’

Urban Development, Construction and Housing Minister Anura Karunathilaka said in Parliament yesterday that although the Government will uphold the rights of Ceylon Electricity Board (CEB) workers, it is not prepared to accept any unjust demands.

“These days, there is some unrest among CEB employees. In the past, it has been proposed to divide CEB into 12 parts. We stopped it and presented a bill with five companies under complete state ownership. Now they have 21 demands. Most of the 21 demands of the CEB workers have already been answered through our bill. But there are also demands that can never be fulfilled.”

The Minister also said that although the Government has accepted the rights of the CEB workers, it is not ready to accept their unfair demands.

‘Govt gradually increasing local maize production, aiming to stop imports’

Government plans through scientific measures to systematically reduce and totally stop importation of maize in the near future, Agriculture and Livestock Deputy Minister Namal Karunaratne told Parliament yesterday (23).

The Deputy Minister said that a new programme to promote maize production in Sri Lanka has been already launched by the Government and added that steps have been taken by the Government to systematically reduce the importing of maize to encourage local maize farmers to increase production.

Responding to a question raised by SJB MP Suranga Rathnayaka, the Deputy Minister said that during the first quarter of 2025, 90,766 hectares have been used for maize farming and 341,595 metric tons of maize has been grown locally, while 67,934 metric tons were imported.

Maize farming technological package has been introduced to increase maize harvest targeting the Anuradhapura, Moneragala, Badulla and Ampara districts that contribute the highest productions of maize in the country. Deputy Minister Karunaratne refuted claims made by Opposition Leader Sajith Premadasa that the Government has imported 300,000 metric tons of maize in the first quarter of 2025 and said that the proposed maize planned to be imported for the entire year of 2025 is only 67,000 metric tons.

National Building Research Institute replaces NBRO, entrusted with legal clout

Environment Deputy Minister Anton Jayakody told Parliament yesterday that the National Building Research Organisation (NBRO) will be renamed the ‘National Building Research Institute’ (NBRI) with the passing of the National Building Research Institute Bill in Parliament yesterday.

“Although the National Building Research Organisation has been functioning since 1984, it has not yet been established by an Act of Parliament. Therefore, the proposed Bill seeks to provide the organisation with legal status in order to properly fulfil the duties, responsibilities, and services entrusted to it.”

He added that once the proposed Bill is passed, the NBRI would be able to take legal action in instances where Local Government institutions fail to adhere to the recommendations issued by the NBRI with regard to landslides.

The NBRI has taken steps to manage landslide-prone areas and minimise the effects of landslides to some extent. He made this statement while participating in the debate on the National Building Research Institute Bill – Second Reading.

“This Bill is important. It checks condition of concrete, building materials and raw materials used when constructing houses. The condition of houses which are being built is also constantly checked and landslide conditions are also monitored.

“There may be weaknesses in the construction structure due to rejection by the earth, quality deficiencies, incompatibility of raw materials, etc. This institution was started in 1984. Landslide monitoring was carried out in the Badulla and Nuwara Eliya districts. A landslide division has also been set up in the National Building Research Organisation to map the risk zones of the two districts. The Disaster Management Centre has also come under this.”

NCM against Deputy Defence Minister: Sajith asks for reports from Cabinet Secretariat, AG to be tabled in Parliament

Opposition Leader Sajith Premadasa called on the Speaker to table in Parliament the relevant reports from the Cabinet Secretariat and the Attorney General which formed the basis for rejecting the No-Confidence Motion (NCM) by the Opposition against Deputy Defence Minister Major General (Retd.) Aruna Jayasekara.

Premadasa said in Parliament yesterday (23) that following the submission of a No-Confidence Motion against Deputy Defence Minister Jayasekara by the Opposition, the relevant reports from the Cabinet Secretariat and the Attorney General, which formed the basis for rejecting the motion, should be presented for Parliamentary discussion.

The Opposition Leader said that he and Opposition members have no personal issues concerning Aruna Jayasekara who is currently serving as the Acting Defence Minister.

A group of 32 Opposition MPs including the Premadasa had submitted a No-Confidence Motion against Deputy Defence Minister Jayasekara to the Speaker in August 2025, citing serious concerns over his alleged involvement and conflict of interest in the investigations into the 2019 Easter Sunday terror attacks, due to his being the Commander of the Eastern Province at that time.

‘No need to compensate fishermen who were safely brought back from India’

Four fishermen in the deep trawler fishing industry have been affected, but since they have been safely brought back to the country from India, there is no need to pay compensation to them, Fisheries, Aquatic and Ocean Resources Minister Ramalingam Chandrasekar told Parliament.

The Minister said this while answering a question raised by MP M. S. Uthumalebbe in Parliament yesterday (23). The Minister said that according to the statements received from the boat owners and boatmen at the Jaffna District Maritime Office on March 17, 2025, on July 7, 2024, four fishermen in a fishing boat belonging to one Amrithalingam ventured into sea for deep sea fishing from the Point Pedro fishing port.

“When the boat was washed away due to strong winds, and disappeared after 29 days, Indian fishermen came and rescued them. It is reported that they stayed with them for nine days and after that they were taken by the Indian Navy and detained at the Chennai Police Station. They were there for three months and 10 days, after which they have been in the Trichy jail for four months and 13 days. Thereafter, they were taken back to Chennai where they were detained for 13 days and then brought back to Sri Lanka by plane.

“The Fisheries Department has taken action to bring the four fishermen who travelled on this fishing boat to Sri Lanka on February 25, 2025. For this, the Department has accepted financial expenditure of more than Rs. 3.44 lakhs.

“The fishermen have not yet been compensated. The Government provides compensation to fishermen who die due to natural calamities while engaged in fishing.

“Also, if the information is confirmed for the fishermen who die in collisions between fishing vessels with other foreign boats, steps will be taken to get compensation by contacting the relevant shipping company.

“Therefore, there is no need to compensate the four fishermen as they have been safely brought home.”

The Minister also said that if the fishermen’s boats and nets are damaged, the Fisheries Department will examine and give an answer as to whether compensation can be provided in this regard.