Marikkar criticises Fonseka’s alleged meetings with President

Says holding secret meetings with President Ranil Wickremesinghe while being part of the SJB is deplorable

Notes Fonseka should fully commit to SJB if he aligns with it or leave to join President Wickremesinghe

Stresses issues must be discussed and resolved within party and not in the public domain

Samagi Jana Balawegaya (SJB) MP S.M. Marikkar yesterday accused party Vice President Field Marshal Sarath Fonseka of holding clandestine meetings with President Ranil Wickremesinghe at State Minister Diana Gamage’s residence.

“I came across information on a website indicating that he is meeting Ranil Wickremesinghe at the residence of State Minister Diana Gamage, whose husband was once Fonseka’s secretary. These actions are deplorable. If he aligns with the SJB, he should fully commit to it. If he prefers Wickremesinghe’s company, then he should depart from our party and join him,” he remarked.

Recently, Fonseka experienced a rift with SJB leader Sajith Premadasa following Premadasa’s decision to welcome Former Army Commander General R.M. Daya Ratnayake to join the party and appoint him as a senior advisor on state affairs.

Fonseka publicly aired his discontent, drawing criticism from fellow party members for choosing to address his grievances in the public sphere rather than within the party’s internal circle.

Speaking to the media, Marikkar emphasised that Fonseka should give the party prior notice if he intends to file a case against it. “I heard he is attempting to pursue legal action to prevent the party from ousting him from his position. If he plans to initiate legal proceedings, he should inform us beforehand. This would allow us to provide him with the reasons for his potential removal if we determine it to be necessary,” he said.

Marikkar remarked that Fonseka’s inability to maintain amicable relationships with those who appointed him to positions might lead to a fallout with the SJB leader, who appointed him as the party’s Vice President.

“There may be internal party issues, but they should be addressed internally. Publicly boasting and then resorting to legal action is unnecessary. If he intends to leave, he can inform us and depart,” he noted.