Top India official thanks former Sri Lanka leader for advancing ties

ECONOMYNEXT — Visting India external affairs minister S Jaishankar has met former Sri Lanka president Ranil Wickremesinghe and thanked him for advancing ties between the two countries in the past two years.

“Glad to see former President @RW_SRILANKA today. Thanked him for his efforts in advancing our ties in the last two years. Assured him that India will continue to commit to Sri Lanka’s economic recovery and development,” he tweeted Friday October 04 afternoon.

Visiting Indian External Affairs Minister @DrSJaishankar called on former President Ranil Wickremesinghe at his residence in Colombo. #SriLanka pic.twitter.com/Fqjzf5qzBr

In June, Wickremesinghe as then president and Narendra Modi, who had just been sworn in for a third consecutive term as Prime Minister of India, reaffirmed their commitment to maintaining strong Indo-Sri Lankan relations.

Wickremesinghe attended the swearing-in ceremony in New Delhi on July 09 on the invitation of Modi.

Modi posed for a group photo with Wickremesinghe next to him.

“Sri Lanka is an important partner in our Neighbourhood First policy. India is proud to be a dependable partner for Sri Lanka. I look forward to realising our joint vision of enhancing connectivity in all its dimensions,” Modi said on social media platform X (twitter).

Modi has reiterated India’s continued commitment to stronger ties with Sri Lanka in keeping with India’s Neighbourhood First Policy and SAGAR vision.

The two leaders also noted the significant progress that has taken place in implementing the Vision Document issued during the visit of Wickremesinghe to New Delhi in July 2023. “In particular, both leaders reiterated their commitment to accelerate the progress in enhancing connectivity in all its dimensions for catalysing mutual growth, development and prosperity,” a statement by the Indian leader’s media said.

Indian media highlighted Wickremesinghe’s presence at the swearing-in ceremony, with billboards displaying images of him and Modi prominently placed around major roundabouts in New Delhi, according to a statement by Wickremesinghe’s media division. (Colombo/Oct04/2024)