World Cup fans left stunned by price of FIFA hospitality package for Sunday’s final

yahoo sports - Spain booked their spot in the final on Tuesday after defeating France, with England and Argentina set to battle it out for their spot on Wednesday.

Ticket prices have been a huge talking point during this summer's World Cup, as many supporters feel FIFA have priced normal soccer fans out of attending the games.

Hospitality options in sports events always come at a premium, but FIFA's offering for the World Cup final takes things to another level.

For the price of $57,500 per person, fans can secure themselves a spot in the pitch side lounge at MetLife Stadium.

Naturally the tickets have not sold out ahead of Sunday's game and fans have not held back with their thoughts over FIFA's money-earning attempts.

FIFA released some further World Cup final tickets recently, but those tickets set back fans a staggering $32,970 each.

Although no one does hospitality like the United States, a $57,500 ticket is always going to prove difficult to sell.

Taking to X, a number of World Cup fans have shared their reactions to the news of FIFA being unable to sell these tickets.

'I would've bought the remaining but unfortunately they're only limited to 6," one fan sarcastically replied.

'Maybe perhaps the interest in the sport in the US has been massively overstated from the beginning?' added another fan.

However, there was one supporter who thought Wednesday's result may see these tickets finally bought up: 'Perhaps when the two final teams are determined the suites will sell.'

World Cup final tickets have halved in price on the secondary market, but the current going rate is still in excess of $7000.

'What on God's green earth is a gourmet live-action cooking station?' replied one confused fan.

Another fan shared their own sarcastic take on the price: 'Not too steep.'

The theme of sarcastic replies continued, with one fan saying: 'Bargain! Can't believe it hasn't sold out!!'

Large parts of this summer's tournament have proven a roaring success, but it is clear that the pricing strategy has blown a lot of people out of contention to attend some of the games.

FIFA World Cup 2026 Golden Boot Race: Top Scorers, Standings and Records

FIFA World Cup 2026 Quiz: Can You Score a 10? Test Your Football Knowledge