SLC targets transparency, professional management

Colombo, Sep. 30 (Daily Mirror) - The Sri Lanka Cricket (SLC) Transformation Committee is pursuing a series of reforms aimed at restoring public trust, strengthening financial accountability and establishing professional governance within the country's cricket administration, committee Chairman Eran Wickramaratne said.

Wickramaratne said that cricket belongs to the public and not to any individual or administrative board, adding that all stakeholders must operate within the law and established regulations.

A key element of the proposed new constitutional framework is to place SLC administration under the principle of public trusteeship. Under the proposed structure, elected board members would be responsible for policy-level decisions, while day-to-day operations would be handled by an independent and professional management team.

"We need to create an independent and expert management... We take policy decisions, while we build the management independently so they remain continuously, providing continuity and longevity," he said.

He said separating policy-making from operational management would ensure greater continuity and support the long-term development of cricket, while also reflecting established corporate governance practices.

Wickramaratne also emphasised the need for strict financial oversight, saying SLC is subject to national auditing and financial regulations. He rejected previous misconceptions that the cricket administration was exempt from transparency requirements, including the Right to Information Act.

The proposed reforms would also require affiliated bodies, including district associations, provincial bodies and clubs, to comply with financial and governance regulations. Wickramaratne said there would be no tolerance for financial or administrative irregularities.

The committee has also identified shortcomings in pitch conditions and cricket infrastructure as areas requiring urgent attention to improve Sri Lanka's competitiveness at international level.

SLC is working with technical experts, to strengthen its technical capabilities. The reforms also include improvements to coaching education, sports medicine and physiotherapy, sports psychology and development programmes for women's cricket.

Wickramaratne said administrators and staff should consider themselves temporary custodians of a national institution, with the ultimate objective being to establish a transparent, resilient and world-class cricket system that serves the public.

"All of us who work here are only here for a period of time... But the institution must go on, and cricket must continue forward," he said.