SJB not prepared to form national Govt. – Mujibur

Says any party with sound judgement will not form a national Govt. with group which bankrupted country

Accuses Govt. of attempting to attract Opposition MPs to join its fold

Claims under the guise of forming a national consensus Govt. is attempting to direct public opposition against it with Opposition

Says Govt. and President, lacking a mandate, are employing various tactics to stay in power

Samagi Jana Balawegaya (SJB) Deputy General Secretary Mujibur Rahman said the party is unwilling to enter into a national Government with the present administration which bankrupted the country, asserting that anyone with sound judgement would refrain from taking such a course of action.

During a press conference at the Opposition Leader’s office over the weekend, Rahman noted that the Government is trying to attract Opposition MPs and, under the guise of the term “national consensus,” share the public’s opposition against the Government with the Opposition.

He accused the Government of delaying the Local Government elections and impeding the people’s ability to express their choice. However, he said the President will not be able to postpone the Presidential election of 2024, and it must be held before October.

He asserted that the Government and the President, lacking a mandate, are employing various tactics to stay in power.

“Before the Presidential election, the Government is planning to restrict democracy, limit the expression of opinions, curtail the right to access information, incarcerate anti-Government activists, and initiate a significant crackdown through the Terrorism Act,” he claimed.  “Feeling that their last moments in power have arrived, they are attempting to suppress the people’s right to access information, the right to express their opinions, and the democratic rights of the people. Wickremesinghe and the Rajapaksas have acknowledged that the conclusion of their rule is imminent. Consequently, they are endeavouring to prolong their authority by stifling the media and the people of the country,” Rahman remarked.

“In a period where the Government lacks the people’s mandate, it is attempting to attract Opposition members by emphasising the term “national consensus.” The Government’s demise is imminent. The SJB is unwilling to participate in any national consensus or national Government,” he said.

“The attempt to form a national Government is for the survival of the ministers in the current Government. The usage of the term “consensus” is merely an attempt to direct objections against Government ministers to the Opposition. The SJB disagrees with this approach, as there is no agreement with those who have contributed to the country’s deterioration,” he added.