Vietjet’s direct Colombo-Ho Chi Minh City flight launch tomorrow

Brings award-recognised brand and signature red uniform to Sri Lanka with new Colombo route

As Vietjet prepares to launch its direct route between Colombo and Ho Chi Minh City on August 18, 2026, the airline is celebrating two recent honours from AirlineRatings organised- Flyers’ Choice Awards 2026: Favourite Low-Cost Carrier and Best Cabin Crew Uniform.

Determined by the travellers’ votes, the awards recognise Vietjet’s distinctive brand and cabin crew style, adding to the anticipation surrounding the airline’s arrival in Sri Lanka.

Vietjet’s first-place finishes in both categories reflect different aspects of the airline experience that resonate with the passengers, from accessible fares and an expanding network to the distinctive style of its cabin crew.

AirlineRatings CEO Sharon Petersen said, “Winning in two categories marks an important tipping point for Vietjet. The airline is now firmly recognised on the global stage, with its uniform playing a key role in that recognition. Unique, fun and instantly recognisable, it leaves a lasting impression long after the flight. The Flyers’ Choice win for best cabin crew uniform reinforces this.”

Created by European designers, Vietjet’s cabin crew uniform features the airline’s signature red and combines youthful energy with inspiration from youth cadet attire. Bow ties, garrison caps, plaid patterns and contemporary styling create a distinctive look that breaks away from conventional airline uniforms.

More than workwear, Vietjet’s signature red has become an integral part of the airline’s identity in the sky, representing a youthful, friendly, confident and forward-looking spirit.

Vietjet’s appeal also lies in its increasingly diverse onboard offerings, featuring a choice of nine fresh, wholesome hot meals, Vikkafe beverages and onboard shopping for duty-free goods, gifts and travel essentials, the same onboard experience the Sri Lankan travellers will be able to enjoy from the very first flight connecting Colombo to Ho Chi Minh City, Vietnam’s commercial hub.

For Sri Lankan travellers, the airline will offer three round-trip flights per week between Colombo and Ho Chi Minh City, as well as connections to major cities and tourist hot spots in Southeast Asia, Australia, China, Japan and South Korea.