Ishara Nanayakkara named Sri Lanka richest person by Gulf-News

ECONOMYNEXT – LOLC’s Ishara Nanayakkara, has been named Sri Lanka’s richest person, in a ranking by by Gulf-News, a UAE based publication, with an estimated net worth of 1.6 billion US dollars.

“As of 2025, Ishara Nanayakkara has emerged as Sri Lanka’s wealthiest person, overtaking Dhammika Perera,” the publication said.

His net worth was estimated at 1.6 billion US dollars, the publication said without giving details of the calculation but said LOLC Holdings was a diversified “financial services and investment conglomerate with operations in over 10 countries.”

“Nanayakkara has played a pivotal role in expanding Sri Lanka’s presence in the global microfinance and insurance sectors,” the report said.

CG Corp’s Binod Chaudhary, was named the richest person in Nepal also with 1.6 billion US dollars. In addition to his Wai Wai noodles, the CG group has operations in electronics, hotels and real estate.

“Despite operating in a smaller economy, Chaudhary has managed to build a multinational presence, making him a unique success story in South Asia,” the publication said.

Mossa Bin Shamsher was named the richest person in Bangladesh with 12 billion dollars in assets claimed, Gulf News said.

“However, these figures remain unverified by global financial rankings like Forbes,” the report said.

“Regardless, Mossa remains a public figure known for his lavish lifestyle, political connections, and philanthropic efforts.”

Shahid Khan, a Pakistan-American billionair was named the country’s richest person with assets of 13.5 billion dollars. Born in Lahore, Khan made his fortune through Flex-N-Gate, an auto parts company.

In Pakistan itself, the wealthiest resident is often cited as Mian Muhammad Mansha, with a net worth of around 3 billion dollars, the report said. His Nishat Group has interests in textiles, banking (MCB), and power generation.

Mukesh Ambani, chairman and managing director of Reliance Industries is India’s richest person with assets estimated at 118 billion US dollars.

His companies range from telecom (Jio), energy, petrochemicals, and retail. (Colombo/Aug11/2025)