SLFP appoints Nimal Siripala as Acting  Chairman amidst intraparty crisis

Sri Lanka Freedom Party (SLFP) politburo appointed SLFP Senior Vice President Nimal Siripala de Silva as its Acting Chairman yesterday replacing the embattled Chairman Maithripala Sirisena who now faces a barrage of legal challenges to secure his post.

The appointment was initiated by the SLFP faction led by former party leader Chandrika Bandaranaike Kumaratunga. This decision followed an interim injunction issued by the Colombo District Court last week, which prohibited SLFP Chairman Maithripala Sirisena from carrying out his duties in the position. This injunction stemmed from a complaint filed by Kumaratunga claiming Sirisena was unsuitable to carry out the role.

The SLFP politburo was forced to convene at the Sri Lanka Foundation Institute (SLFI) yesterday to address the issue after the police cordoned off the SLFP head office on Darley Road following a complaint lodged by Acting General Secretary Sarathi Dushmantha Mitrapala, who has aligned with Sirisena. Mithrapala reported to the Maradana Police that certain files on Sirisena had disappeared after the faction led by Kumaratunga assumed control of the party.

The special politburo meeting of the SLFP was held under the patronage of Nimal Siripala de Silva. At the event, Kumaratunga declined to address the media and said she would not entertain any questions regarding the matter.

Despite being informed the day before by Mitrapala that they lacked the authority to convene a special politburo meeting, the Kumaratunga faction proceeded with the meeting regardless.

The latest division within the party arose at the end of March when Maithripala Sirisena and the Executive Council of the party ousted SLFP members Duminda Dissanayake, Lasantha Alagiyawanna, and Mahinda Amaraweera from their roles within the party over disciplinary violations.

Sirisena has accused the trio of attempting to align the SLFP with the Government. In response, days later Kumaratunga sought a court order for the removal of Sirisena from the position of Chairman, citing his unsuitability for the role.