RUNNING SCARED?

Never in our recent political history has there been such a simultaneous exodus of political stalwarts, declaring their intent to retire from politics. This is akin to the story of Noah’s Ark, where the threat of imminent disaster, ignited an escape, spurred by a natural existential threat.

Why this sudden realization of the point at which the certainty of age-related decadence, overtakes the myth of the limitless benefit of experience? There has to be something more. Some of these suddenly awakened denizens, may be smelling a so far suppressed and cocooned, visitation by justice as the consequence of moral default and sustained larceny.

After all, the reality of a bounteous ill-earned pension, makes further clinging to escape earthly, or even cosmic punishment, somewhat idiotic. The axe of equity held over their heads by the recently installed NPP Presidency, with intent to eliminate blatant “feathering of nests” and ill-gotten wealth is unnerving. So “gather what you can and vamoose” is the sage wisdom of the day.

The forceful eviction of the “Aragalaya,” perhaps the only real mass uprising against the growing tyranny of a wicked and insensitive tyranny, is reaping its desserts. The success of the NPP was a popular opposition against the pervasive overall greed and lawlessness. This united a number of traditionally misguided (by politicos), citizens, separated by erected barriers of religio-cultural, linguistic, caste and economic differences.

Forces which chose to ignore the spontaneity, discipline and passion of mainly youth, who are most hurt by a regime blinded by avarice and selfish indulgence, are surely doomed. As has happened so many times in history, a people joined by a common cause, are formidable and invincible.

Mere flight from the battle ground will not save them. A resolute pursuit surely will be sustained. If not, the same inexorable fate will await the NPP.

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.