“One more such victory and we are done for” – King Pyrrhus of Epirus, in 279 B.C.

Can the democracy of the US last more years of such Pyrrhic victories under Donald Trump?

King Pyrrhus made this statement when he won a war against the Romans at such devastating cost that it was virtually a defeat, implying that any more “wins” like that would destroy his country.

During his campaign for a second term in 2024, Trump announced that he would stop the Russian invasion of Ukraine even before he took his presidential oaths, that the Israel Gaza conflict would end on Day One of his presidency. He promised there will be no new wars during his presidency.

He also promised that the high grocery, gas, housing and other prices will start coming down immediately. As will Inflation caused by the mismanagement of the Biden administration. “We will be winning so much that Americans will get sick of winning”.

Americans – at least 70% of them are now furious after all these “wins”.

The Russian/Ukraine war continues to rage. Israeli Prime Minister Netanyahu’s military forces, the IDF, has been kept busy, completing the genocide of the Palestinians in the Gaza and the West Bank and bombing Lebanon.

The United States of America, under the presidency of Donald Trump, has been inundated with so many “wins”, mainly against themselves, that, like King Pyrrhus’ Epirus, democracy may be “done for” not long after its 250th birthday.

When asked about his promise to bring prices and inflation down from Day One of his presidency, he says he has been too busy keeping Israel safe from a nuclear attack by Iran, a country which has no arsenal of nuclear weaponry. And playing golf.

During his campaigns, Trump had promised “no new wars” . But during the first months of his second term, he made his intentions of invasion of sovereign states clear; to colonize Canada, Greenland, both NATO allies, to take over Cuba and gain control of Venezuela with its largest oil fields in the world, by military force, if necessary. He attempted to justify his intentions on the basis of the Monroe Doctrine, which he renamed the “Donroe Doctrine”, again displaying his complete ignorance of American history.

The Monroe Doctrine declared, in 1823, that the USA will not tolerate any further European interference or colonization in the Western Hemisphere, framing any such intervention in the Americas as a direct threat to US national security.

Which is the exact opposite of Trump’s plans of acquisition– to make Canada the 51st state of the USA, acquire a NATO ally, Greenland, to take over communist Cuba, and control the largest oil fields of the world in Venezuela.

Trump declared war on Iran, on February 8, 2026 on the basis that Iran was developing nuclear weapons in an imminent plan to destroy Israel. With no evidence or provocation whatsoever. “Israel would have been blown up a long time ago, had I not gotten involved. Without me, there would be no Israel”. There seems to be no depths to the levels of Trump’s narcissism.

Trump had already claimed a victory when he instructed the bombing of Iran’s key nuclear enrichment facilities in June 2025. He announced that US bombers had “totally and completely obliterated” Iran’s nuclear program.

However, the June 2025 bombings had only set Iran’s nuclear program back by about two years. Iran is a hard-core, authoritarian, Islamic regime which has always shown their hatred towards Israel. And Vice has always been Versa. Netanyahu’s hatred and desire to destroy Iran goes back 40 years. But Iran certainly does not have the capacity to attack Israel with nuclear weapons. Israel has been equipped with nuclear weapons supplied by the US in the 1960s, and even trigger-happy war criminal, Netanyahu has always resisted the temptation of using nuclear power to attack Iran.

On February 8th, the day Trump declared war, the Strait of Hormuz, a waterway controlled by Iran, had always been freely open to international shipping. The strait provides the only sea passage from the Persian Gulf to open seas, and is one of the world’s most strategically important maritime bottlenecks. It is the only route through which 20% of the world’s liquefied natural gas and 25% of seaborne oil pass through annually, a major route of petroleum products critical for the energy supply of Europe and Asia. The strait had never been closed before Trump’s war. The closure of the strait caused by blockades by Iran has become the major focus of the war, with prices of barrels of oil soaring in world markets.

Iran had not abandoned its plans of acquisition pf nuclear power, except during the three years after the signing of the JCPOA (Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action) in 2015. Commonly known as the Iran nuclear deal, the JCPOA was a landmark agreement between Iran and the PS+1 (the United States, the U.K., France, China, Russia plus Germany). The agreement, which was successfully concluded after two years of negotiations, limited Iran’s nuclear program for at least 10 years (with provisions for extension) in exchange for release of frozen assets and sanctions relief. The agreement was subject to international inspection, and Iran had been in compliance with all the terms of the agreement until 2018, when Trump tore it up.

The agreement was one of the most fiercely debated topics in modern foreign policy. Supporters argued that it successfully blocked Iran’s path to a nuclear weapon, and reopened the critical strait of Hormuz, while critics said that it offered too much in the release of frozen assets and sanctions.

Trump withdrew the United States the JCPOA in 2018, which effectively nullified all its terms and conditions in 2018. For no reason, except from that the JCPOA was the brainchild of President Obama. The only alternative plan Trump announced on a regular basis was that he was going to commit genocide by bombing Iran to the Stone Ages.

Trump’s economic policies were in the gutter, with increasing grocery, gas and housing prices. Inflation is soaring. His immigration policies showed little success, and Gestapo-like ICE (Immigration and Customs Enforcement) tactics, had harassed and deported undocumented immigrants. ICE agents had harassed American citizens, even killed two American citizens for no reason but non-violent protesting. ICE agents have now been forced out of Minneapolis.

The Epstein Files have still not been released by the Trump controlled Department of Justice, in spite of demands of Congress, including Republicans.

The closure of the Strait of Hormuz was adversely affecting the global economy. Trump’s approval rates were at 36%, the lowest in presidential history.

Trump declared war against Iran in February, as diplomacy had failed to contain Iran’s program towards the acquisition of a nuclear weapon. The conflict began with massive airstrikes that killed Supreme Leader Ayotollah Ali Khamanei and other top officials. However, this did not result in regime change; the Assembly of Experts transferred leadership to the dead Ayotollah’s son, who is known to be even more hard-core than his father.

US and Israeli attacks caused heavy damage to Iran’s navy, air defense systems and nuclear and ballistic infrastructure. In retaliation, Iran enforced a blockade of the strait of Hormuz, leading to one of the largest global gas and oil supply disruptions in history and causing an international energy crisis.

In mid-June, the United States and Iran reached an agreement, according to which military operations on all fronts were ceased, and the strait of Hormuz reopened. A more formal 14-point agreement was reached last week, which has already been signed by the US. Iran is scheduled to sign it on Friday, June 19.

I cannot comment on this 14-point agreement as I have not seen the details, but general opinion is that the Master of the Deal has, once again, been trumped, and had left Iran in a much stronger position.

Both sides will call the agreement a win, especially Trump, who has never lost anything but his self-respect. He joked the other day that he will take the credit if the agreement succeeds; if it fails, the blame will be on Vice President Vance.

How long this agreement will last, even whether it would be finalized, is anybody’s guess.

The ceremonial opening of the Obama Presidential Center was held, with much pomp and circumstance, on Thursday night (our time), with a host pf the biggest performers in the United States. The date, June 19, was significant. Named “Juneteenth”, it was celebrated as the Independence Day of African Americans. June 19, 1865 marks the day, when Union troops arrived in Galveston, Texas, to enforce the Emancipation Proclamation and free the last enslaved people in Texas.

The national anthem was sung beautifully as only Jennifer Hudson can, and the thousands of fans were treated to a show with the most brilliant stars in entertainment that only the Obamas can attract.

Michelle and Barack Obama gave exceptionally inspiring speeches. I wish I had the time to digest these speeches and share them with you. The stage was filled with past Presidents and First Ladies, and there was a host of VIPs and thousands of Obama fans. But the show was stolen by the Obama girls, who were seven and nine when their dad was in the White House. They have grown up to be the most elegant, charming young ladies.

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.