Sri Lanka in talks to end Israel linked travel advisories, full security to tourists: Minister

ECONOMYNEXT  – Sri Lanka is in talks with foreign embassies to remove travel advisories after warnings of attacks on Israeli tourists in Arugam Bay, a beach resort in  the island’s East Coast, while further ensuring protection to tourists visiting the island, Minister Vijitha Herath said.

“We are in discussions (to remove travel advisories),” Minister Herath told reporters Thursday.

“What we should do is to take action to strengthen security. We have taken action, if required we will do more in the future.”

The US issued a warning for citizens not to travel to Arugam Bay, saying there was credible information of a possible attacks in the area, which was repeated by the British and some other embassies.

Israel asked citizens to leave Argugam Bay and several beach resorts and not to engage in activities that may show their nationality.

Sri Lanka has arrested three persons, all Sri Lankans, for questioning related to the alleged plan to stage attacks Israelis.

Israel asks citizens to leave Sri Lanka coastal towns, hide nationality

Authorities deployed police and special task force officers to Arugam Bay and other resort areas, and also sent intelligence agents to selected locations, Acting Police Chief Priyantha Weerasuriya has said. A hotline hot line for tourists, 1997 has been opened.

Minister Herath said it was the responsibility of the embassies concerned to ensure the security of their citizens which is why warnings are issued.

“What we want to tell the public and tourists is that they should not have any fears,” Minister Herath said.

“We have taken maximum steps to provide security to foreign tourists. Police has taken the required steps, the tri forces have taken steps. They can freely come to the country.”

“It is our view that the warnings can be removed  in a few days.”

About 570 Israeli tourists were currently in the country and some were still arriving while others are completing their stay and leaving, officials said.

Sri Lanka received initial information early in October but there was a presumption that there could be attacks in a number of counties against Israelis even earlier he said.

The travel warning came just as the so-called winter peak season is starting.

Sri Lanka tourist sector is starting to recover from a visa crisis after a IVS-GBS and VFS Global was given a contract to process visa, where high fees were charged to go through a complex website.

Court has temporarily halted the process and 50 dollar visa are now available through a simple process after the new administration restored the old system. (Colombo/Oct25/2024)