UK-Sri Lanka trade mission boosts women entrepreneurs’ export potential

ECONOMYNEXT – Sri Lanka’s Export Development Board (EDB) and the International Trade Centre (ITC) conducted 59 factory visits to women-led businesses as part of the UK-Sri Lanka Trade Mission under the SheTrades Commonwealth+ Programme.

The initiative brought buyers from the West and North Yorkshire Chamber of Commerce and the Greater Birmingham Chamber of Commerce to Sri Lanka, highlighting women-led businesses across Colombo, Gampaha, Kalutara, Kurunegala, Kandy, Matale, Galle, Matara, Jaffna, Mulative  and Kilinochchi.

Participating women entrepreneurs, from apparel and agri-food sectors, were able to connect with UK buyers, showcase their products and explore new export markets, particularly in the UK.

“This mission reflects our commitment to empowering women entrepreneurs and positioning them as key contributors to Sri Lanka’s export economy,” EDB Chairman and Chief Executive Officer Mangala Wijesinghe said.

The visiting buyers engaged with production facilities and entrepreneurs, gaining insights into their operations and the value propositions of their products.

These interactions fostered potential trade partnerships and highlighted the export readiness of Sri Lankan businesses, the EDB said.

“The engagement with Sri Lankan women entrepreneurs was both productive and inspiring. Their dedication to quality and sustainability aligns well with the expectations of UK buyers,” Zouk Group Ltd’s Tayub Amjad said.

“It is very important for UK businesses to explore new suppliers. This mitigates risk from political or geological problems that existing suppliers may face,” President of the Greater Birmingham Chamber of Commerce Dr Nasir Awan said.

“It also helps companies in developing countries to scale up their businesses and provides ethical and sustainable products to today’s conscious consumers.”

The SheTrades Commonwealth+ Programme continues to drive economic empowerment by creating equitable opportunities for women to access international markets.

The UK-Sri Lanka Trade Mission have amplified opportunities for women entrepreneurs and set the foundation for future collaborations.

This mission is a significant step forward in integrating women entrepreneurs into global trade. (Colombo/Dec12/2024)