The British Council hosts pre-departure briefing for Sri Lanka’s 2024 Commonwealth Scholars

The British Council of Sri Lanka successfully hosted an interactive and informative Pre-departure Briefing for the 2024 group of Commonwealth Scholars as they prepared for their departure. Held at the British Council library, the event provided the 5 scholars chosen this year with valuable information, tips and updates about the UK in order to ensure a smooth transition to their respective university destinations in the UK.

Commonwealth Scholarships are given by the Commonwealth Scholarship Commission in the UK (CSC) to talented individuals with the potential to make a positive impact on the global stage and in their home country. Each year around 800 students globally are given the chance to undertake postgraduate degrees with UK universities. Since 1960, the CSC has funded over 31,000 individuals to study in the UK and gain skills, acquire knowledge, and build networks to tackle global development challenges.

The briefing event was attended by the departing group of scholars, and a gathering of Commonwealth Scholars alumni of different ages and fields of expertise, led by the British Council’s Education Programmes Manager, Hamzi Haniff. This year’s group of scholars from Sri Lanka are pursuing postgraduate qualifications in diverse fields of study including Marine Biology, Economics, Public Policy, Finance and Accounting and City Planning and Design. During the event, the group was guided through the various resources and guidelines provided by the Commonwealth Scholarship Commission. The session also covered all vital aspects of moving to UK including visa and travel, settling in and adjusting to life in the UK, accommodation, managing finances, living safely, anti-discrimination policies, and personal safety. The alumni members present at the event shared their insights with the scholars about their personal experiences during their respective stints in the UK. They emphasized on the importance of gaining an all-round experience of academics and social life.

Sharing her thoughts, The British Council’s Education Programmes Manager Hamzi Haniff stated, “Celebrating 65 years this year, the Commonwealth Scholarship has had a profound impact on Sri Lanka. Over 70% of our Commonwealth Scholarship Alumni have returned and remained, contributing significantly to the development of the country. With over 1,150 scholars having passed through the portals of this prestigious scholarship, many have utilised this opportunity to reach great heights and drive progress in Sri Lanka.”

Mastercard and Bank of Ceylon collaborate to launch Sri Lanka’s first medical tourism card

Jaya Container Terminals celebrates 16 years of success with record-breaking growth

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.