Japan urges steady implementation of Japan-assisted mega projects in SL

‘There is a need for Sri Lanka to restore Japanese investors’ confidence in its economic landscape. Accordingly, Japan underscores the importance of Sri Lanka ensuring the steady implementation of mega projects assisted by Japan, including the BIA expansion project, Japanese ambassador to Sri Lanka Akio ISOMATA said.

The Japanese ambassador made these comments at the 46th AGM of the Sri Lanka-Japan Business Council (SLJBC) of the Ceylon Chamber of Commerce (CCC) recently.

Extracts from a CCC press release: ‘Athulla R F Edirisinghe – Director, Hirohama Ceylon (Pvt) Ltd, was elected president of the SLJBC for the year 2025/26. Ruwan Waidyaratne – Managing Director, Hayleys Advantis Ltd, Shamil Mendis – Managing Director, Spear International (Pvt) Ltd, and Rohitha Mendis – Managing Director of Prudential Shipping Lines (Pte) Ltd., were elected Senior Vice President, Vice President and Treasurer of the Council respectively. Mahen Kariyawasan – Managing Director, Andrew The Travel Company (Pvt) Ltd will continue to serve the committee as the Immediate Past President.

‘The committee comprises representatives from ASOL Traders, Brandix Apparel (Pvt) Ltd, Vidullanka PLC, Dentsu Grant (Pvt) Ltd, Aitken Spence Cargo (Pvt) Ltd, Lanka Harness Co (Pvt)Ltd, Heritage Teas (Pvt) Ltd, Spillburg Holdings (Pvt)Ltd, Venora International Projects (Pvt) Ltd, MAC Holdings (Pvt)Ltd. By Invitation Amano Lanka Engineering (Pvt) Ltd.

‘Chief Guest Akio ISOMATA, ambassador of Japan to Sri Lanka, highlighted the rapid growth of the Sri Lankan community in Japan, with over 57,000 currently living, working, and studying there. He also encouraged stakeholders to work together for the improvement of the business environment and promotion of investment in untapped resources in Sri Lanka. He also proposed that a Sri Lankan business delegation visit Japan in coordination with the Sri Lankan President’s future visit there. He reaffirmed the embassy’s full support for the SLJBC in strengthening bilateral trade, investment, and people-to-people ties.

‘In his final address, the outgoing president highlighted the Council’s active role in promoting Sri Lanka at the Expo Pavilion in Osaka, which earned recognition from the Japanese Foreign Minister for strengthening bilateral relations. He noted discussions on a potential trilateral economic corridor between India, Sri Lanka, and Japan, while also outlining key upcoming initiatives: coordinating the official visit of the President of Sri Lanka to Japan in September, hosting a Sri Lanka Day at the Osaka Pavilion on September 27th, organizing a business forum in Osaka on September 26th, and holding a main business forum in Tokyo on September 29th in collaboration with JCCI and JETRO.

‘In his inaugural address at the AGM, the newly appointed president expressed appreciation of Japan’s continued support to Sri Lanka, including solar-powered facilities for maternity hospitals, and called for stronger local and overseas partnerships. He noted Japan’s need for 830,000 skilled workers by 2030, urging efforts to overcome language barriers and enhance training to expand opportunities for Sri Lankans already working in Japan. Acknowledging declining Japanese interest due to past crises, he proposed establishing a technical working group, advancing key projects, and sending a business delegation with the Sri Lankan President’s upcoming visit to strengthen bilateral relations and attract investment. Mr. Edirisinghe suggested the government to explore possibilities in setting up an Exclusive Investment Zone for Japanese investors following the Indian and Bangladesh examples.’

The Sri Lanka – Japan Business Council plays an important role in promoting trade, tourism, and investments between the Japan and Sri Lanka. Companies interested in joining the membership of the Sri Lanka – Japan Business Council may contact Kiyara at The Ceylon Chamber of Commerce via E-mail: businesscouncils1@chamber.lk or Tel.: 011 5588875/ 5588800.

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.