Surge Global secures second landmark win in Qatar with contract topping Rs.1billion

Surge Global, a best-in-class design, technology, and marketing firm, is excited to announce that it has secured its second landmark technology transformation project in Qatar, with an engagement in excess of a billion rupees. This event underscores Surge’s continued commitment to delivering solutions and driving technological advancements in the region.

The project, aimed at transforming Qatar’s technology landscape, will leverage Surge Global’s extensive expertise in software, data, and analytics and performance marketing.

“The business has matured and has demonstrated our ability to take on complex critical pieces of work for large institutions and governments – this is exciting as the gulf is a region we’re excited to dig into” said Bhanuka Harischandra, CEO of Surge Global. “As a company with Sri Lankan origins, we take pride in showcasing our capabilities on an international stage, reflecting its global competitiveness.”

Surge’s approach focuses on delivering quick wins and building from the results. This allows its clients to reap in excess of 3-5x the investment made. This strategy aligns perfectly with the goals of the technology transformation project, ensuring that impactful solutions are implemented rapidly and sustainably.

This project not only enhances Surge’s portfolio but also solidifies its reputation as a leader in the technology sector. By fostering technological growth in Qatar, Surge aims to contribute significantly to the nation’s vision for a digital future.

For more information about Surge Global and its projects, please visit www.surge.global or contact hello@surge.global

Brandix gifts school essentials for 8th consecutive year, strengthens commitment to Sri Lankan youth

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.