Doctors without Borders focus on advancing humanitarian medical innovation and research

Doctors without Borders – Asia 2024 held at the India Habitat Centre on 25th October, 2024 brought together over 200 researchers, academics, and patient representatives dedicated to advancing humanitarian medical innovation and research.

The conference held in collaboration with Atal Bihari Vajpayee Institute of Medical Sciences and Dr. Ram Manohar Lohia (RML) Hospital featured a series of compelling presentations and discussions that highlighted the need for new solutions to health challenges in conflict-affected and resource-limited settings. This year’s agenda featured compelling discussions across four primary themes: ‘Driving Health Reform’, ‘Antimicrobial Resistance,’ ‘Health Inequities,’ and ‘Human Cost of Violence’.

The lineup of speakers featured experts from esteemed institutions and organisations such as FIND, The Union, ReAct Asia Pacific, Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR), BRAC University (Dhaka, Bangladesh), Sangath India and Jindal School of Public Health & Human Development. Shweta Narayan, Campaign Lead at Global Climate and Health Alliance, India, delivered a special address on a critical intersection – ‘Climate Crisis and Health: Role of the Health Community as Advocates for Climate Change’. Dr Farhat Mantoo, Executive Director of MSF South Asia, emphasized the importance of localized interventions in her welcome remarks, “MSF Scientific Days continues to be a space for learning, sharing knowledge and stimulating dialogue. Here in Asia, we are tackling unique challenges, and it is essential that our approaches are informed by local realities. The evidence and science-based solutions we share during this conference will further enable communities to lead the transformation of their health systems while keeping attention and ear to needs of patients.”

NDB Bank’s sustainable bond framework receives ‘Good’ rating from Sustainable Fitch

FAO introduces innovative technologies to build resilience in Sri Lanka’s fisheries sector

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.