Ceylinco General Insurance conducts island-wide 100 km beach clean-up project

Ceylinco General Insurance recently organised an island-wide beach clean-up programme along the coastline of Sri Lanka, covering over 100 kms, with the participation of its staff from its island-wide branches and the head office.

This beach clean-up initiative was held for the third consecutive year and has now become an annual event in the company’s Corporate Social Responsibility calendar.

Beaches in Sri Lanka are increasingly facing pollution, particularly along coastlines in tourist hotspots and densely populated areas. Ceylinco General Insurance believes it is the responsibility of all citizens – both individuals and corporations – to help preserve the natural beauty and cleanliness of our beaches and the surrounding ocean.

Along with organising and conducting the initiative, over 1,250 employees selflessly volunteered to clear debris, plastics and polythene waste from the shoreline. The litter was collected and segregated in disposable bags. The collected waste was handed over to the solid waste disposable units of Municipal Councils and Pradeshiya Sabhas of the respective areas for disposal in a sustainable manner.

The main objective of the project was to see the coastline return to a pristine condition, preserving its beauty and making it tourist friendly.

The aim of the cleanup was also to stop more waste from entering the ocean and causing harm to marine life and the ocean’s ecosystem, as marine pollution around Sri Lanka is becoming a serious cause for concern.

Ceylinco General Insurance engages in a range of such community-centred projects to have a positive impact on society. This massive Beach clean-up project will serve to inspire more people and organisations to keep Sri Lanka’s beaches clean.

Ceylon Energy and HJT China marks completion of Maho and Ampara 33kV power distribution lines

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.