ProFood ProPack and AgBiz 23rd edition from 21 Aug.

Sri Lanka’s premium exhibition for the food processing, packaging, and agriculture sectors, ProFood ProPack and AgBiz 2026, will return to BMICH from 21 to 23 August 2026, bringing together local and international industry leaders, innovators, entrepreneurs, and consumers for knowledge exchange, innovation, and business networking.

Organised by the Sri Lanka Food Processors Association (SLFPA) together with the professional exhibition organiser, Lanka Exhibition and Conference Services Ltd., the three-day exhibition is expected to attract more than 30,000 trade and consumer visitors, while featuring over 450 exhibition stalls spread across 6 exhibition halls. The event will host over 50 international exhibitors and participants representing countries including China, India, and Germany, strengthening its position as one of the region’s leading industry platforms.

Initiated to serve both business-to-consumer (B2C) and business-to-business (B2B) audiences, ProFood ProPack and AgBiz 2026 will connect packaging specialists, exporters, retailers, manufacturers, food processors, distributors, entrepreneurs, investors, and the public, creating valuable opportunities for networking, knowledge sharing, and business growth.

SLFPA President Aruna Senanayake said: “We remain deeply committed to supporting Sri Lanka’s small and medium-scale food processors, who represent the backbone of our industry. The SME Pavilion, organised by the Industries Ministry has attracted a significant number of SMEs in previous years and provided tremendous support by bringing together many SME exhibitors under one roof for this mega event. This exhibition will provide SMEs with a valuable opportunity to showcase their innovations, gain market exposure and receive valuable feedback from end consumers.”

The SME Pavilion will serve as a dedicated platform for emerging businesses and entrepreneurs to showcase their innovative products, solutions, and technologies to industry professionals, investors, buyers, and potential business partners. Initiated by the Industry and Entrepreneurship Development Ministry and co-organised with its support, the pavilion aims to empower SMEs by providing them with greater market access and visibility. Eligible SMEs can participate at half the exhibition stall fee, enabling them to connect with stakeholders and unlock opportunities for sustainable growth and expansion.

ProFood ProPack and AgBiz 2026 Organising Committee Co-Chairmen Nadishan Guruge and Sameera Jayathilake said: “ProFood ProPack and AgBiz has grown into a key platform that brings together the entire food processing, packaging and agriculture ecosystem, creating opportunities for innovation, collaboration, and business development. This year’s edition will further elevate the experience by expanding international participation, showcasing emerging technologies and providing dedicated platforms for startups, SMEs and industry professionals to connect with potential partners and consumers. We believe this exhibition will continue to play an important role in supporting the growth and competitiveness of Sri Lanka’s food and agriculture sectors while opening new avenues for knowledge exchange and investments.”

With its expanded international participation, comprehensive exhibition showcase and knowledge-driven program, ProFood ProPack and AgBiz 2026 is set to reinforce Sri Lanka’s position as a growing hub for food processing, packaging and agricultural innovation while creating new opportunities for sustainable industry development, investment, and collaboration.