Viruliya Sevana, ex-female armed forces veterans celebrate 10th anniversary

Viruliya Sevana, an organisation of ex-female veterans from the Army, Navy, and Air Force, is proudly celebrating its 10th anniversary with the telecast of an inspiring documentary film titled Aapasu Haren in conjunction with International Children’s Day.

This impactful film, centred on a child-focused theme, thoughtfully explores the evolving values in modern society and the unique challenges faced by today’s younger generation. The story culminates in an empowering message, encouraging adult viewers to seek solutions within themselves, fostering a safer and more nurturing environment for our children.

The documentary beautifully embodies Viruliya Sevana’s guiding motto, “Yaha Guna Dam Veduma Uthum” meaning “Fostering positive qualities is invaluable” and features a talented cast of children of retired military women.

Reflecting on the inspiration for the film, Viruliya Sevana Founder and President Rtd. Major Ramani Bandara shared, “This documentary was born out of a deep desire to address the concerns of our country’s future generation, who are navigating the complexities of shifting social values. We believe it is our responsibility to stand up for the children of our nation and guide them toward a brighter future.”

The script, crafted by Dr. Priyantha Navaratne, has been brought to life under the expert direction of Ranjith Jayasekara, with music composed by Major Wijesudara Weragoda. Viruliya Sevana is honoured to have the support of well-known business leader and Chairman of Ramya Holdings, Ramya Weerakoon, who serves as the Patron of the organisation, which was founded in 2014.

Aapasu Haren, translating to “About Turn!” was streamed at Indira Cancer Trust (Suwa Sevana) at Maharagama on the Universal Children’s day which fell on the 1 October.

It will also be made available on YouTube to reach a broader audience, ensuring that its message resonates with children and adults alike. Major Ramani Bandara emphasised that the film seeks to inspire responsible citizenship across the country, underscoring its vital relevance in today’s society.