Thilan Wijesinghe categorically denies allegations contained on Parliamentary list

Following a statement made by Minister Bimal Rathnayake in Parliament on October 8, 2026, naming Thilan Wijesinghe in connection with the alleged violations of anti-corruption legislation relating to the awarding of contracts for state development projects, Wijesinghe has issued the following response:

“I categorically deny the allegation and am completely unaware of any such case or any formal or informal allegations of this nature against me.

The Hansard record of the Parliamentary proceedings has not yet been released. The Parliamentary Secretariat has informed that it is expected to be available next week.

Based on the media reporting currently available, I understand that the allegations relate to 2010, a period during which I held no public office and functioned as Group Managing Director of Overseas Realty Ceylon PLC.

During the period 2017-2019, I was the first Chairman of the National Agency for Public Private Partnership (NAPPP). I held this position on an honorary basis, with no payment or remuneration for my service. The NAPPP functioned as a unit of the Finance Ministry. It had no legal authority to award or even recommend any state development contracts. As such, no contracts of that nature were entered into.

I have reached out to Minister Bimal Rathnayake’s office seeking clarification on the basis on which my name was included on this list.

Throughout my career, I have sought to uphold the principles of fairness, integrity and ethical conduct in every position I have held. I have no cases pending against me and have not been asked by any state enforcement agency to provide a statement in relation to such an allegation. Should any formal investigations commence, I will fully co-operate.

Given the serious reputational and financial consequences of publicly associating an individual with allegations of corruption, I trust that the circumstances leading to my name being included on this list will be clarified promptly and that the record will be corrected accordingly.”