Vice Admiral Damian Fernando assumes office as new Navy Commander

Colombo, July 1 (Daily Mirror) - President Anura Kumara Dissanayake promoted the Chief of Staff of the Sri Lanka Navy, Rear Admiral Damian Fernando to the 3 star rank of Vice Admiral and appointed him as the 27th Commander of the Sri Lanka Navy with effect from 01 Jul 26.

In a symbolic gesture of handing over command, the outgoing Navy Commander Admiral Kanchana Banagoda presented the Admiral's Sword to the newly appointed Commander of the Navy, Vice Admiral Damian Fernando at the Navy Headquarters. Subsequently, Vice Admiral Damian Fernando was accorded a 48 - member Guard of Honour, marked by time-honoured naval traditions. The newly appointed Navy Commander commenced his official duties amidst the chanting of blessings and religious observances from all faiths, invoking success for his tenure ahead.

Vice Admiral Fernando joined the Executive Branch of the Sri Lanka Navy as an Officer Cadet of the 21st Intake in 1991 after completing his education at the St. Joseph Vaz College, Wennapuwa. Upon successfully completing his initial naval training at the Naval and Maritime Academy, Trincomalee, he was commissioned as a Sub Lieutenant in 1993.

Throughout his distinguished naval career, Vice Admiral Fernando has completed a wide range of professional military education and specialist training programmes both in Sri Lanka and overseas. These include the Long Gunnery and Missile Course at INS Dronacharya, India (2003), the Naval Weapons Engineering Course in China (2010), and the Royal College of Defence Studies (RCDS) Programme in the United Kingdom.

An accomplished scholar, he holds a Master's Degree in Defence Studies from General Sir John Kotelawala Defence University and a Master's Degree in International Security and Strategy from King's College London.

During his illustrious career, he has held numerous key operational, command and staff appointments, including: Naval Armament Officer; Director of Naval Weapons, Commanding Officer Fourth Fast Attack Flotilla; Captain Operations Department (Western Naval Area); Commandant of the Naval and Maritime Academy; Director General Personnel; Commander, North Central Naval Area; Commander, Eastern Naval Area and Deputy Chief of Staff and Chief of Staff of the Sri Lanka Navy. Immediately prior to assuming command of the Sri Lanka Navy, Vice Admiral Damian Fernando served as the Chief of Staff from 31 Dec 24.

For his gallantry during humanitarian operations, he was awarded the Rana Sura Padakkama. In recognition of his exemplary service, impeccable conduct and unwavering dedication to duty, he was also awarded the Uttama Seva Padakkama. Furthermore, he has received six Letters of Commendation from successive Commanders of the Sri Lanka Navy for his outstanding professional service.

A keen sportsman, Vice Admiral Fernando has represented the Sri Lanka Navy Cricket Team as a player and had also served as the Chairman of the Sri Lanka Navy Cricket Association previously.

The occasion was attended by the Commander of the Navy’s beloved spouse, Mrs. Kaushalya Opatha Fernando, their daughters Kalsha Fernando and Cecilia Fernando and their son Febian Fernando.