President Ranil and other world leaders extend condolences over death of Iranian President Raisi

President Ranil Wickremesinghe on Monday expressed condolences following the demise of Iranian President Dr. Seyyed Ebrahim Raisi and Foreign Minister Hossein Amir-Abdollahian.

Sri Lanka is deeply shocked and saddened by the tragic death of President Ebrahim Raisi, Foreign Minister Amir-Abdollahian and other senior Iranian officials, said the Sri Lankan head of State, who is currently on a visit to Indonesia.

“I express my deepest sympathies and sincere condolences to the bereaved families, the government and the people of Iran.”

“Our thoughts and prayers are with the families of President Raisi and his entourage,” he said, in a post on ‘X’ (formerly Twitter).

Accompanied by Foreign Minister Amir-Abdollahian, Raisi had engaged in a short visit to the island nation just last month, the first by an Iranian president in 16 years.

The two countries had signed five pacts during the visit, only the second since one in April 2008 by Iran’s then president, Mahmoud Ahmadinejad.

Opening a $514-million ‘Uma Oya’ hydro power project, Raisi had pledged to support development projects in the island by providing technical and engineering services.

The Uma Oya project, in the central Badulla district, was constructed with Iranian technical assistance. It was started in 2010 by Iran’s FARAB engineering group and Iran initially provided $50 million.

But in 2013, funding could not be continued because of international sanctions against Iran. The Sri Lankan government then decided to complete the project with its own funds using the same Iranian contractor.

Raisi was killed in a helicopter crash in mountainous terrain near the Azerbaijan border, officials and state media confirmed on Monday. The helicopter was also carrying Foreign Minister Hossein Amir-Abdollahian and six other passengers and crew.

World leaders offered their condolences on Monday following the tragic death.

“Seyed Ebrahim Raisi was an outstanding politician whose entire life was devoted to serving the Motherland.

“As a true friend of Russia, he made an invaluable personal contribution to the development of good neighbourly relations between our countries and made great efforts to bring them to the level of strategic partnership.”

“As a colleague who personally witnessed his efforts for the peace of the Iranian people and our region during his time in power, I remember Mr. Raisi with respect and gratitude.”

“The passing of President Raisi is an immense tragedy and a profound loss for the Islamic Republic of Iran, its people, and its friends.

“Nevertheless, we have faith that the noble people of Iran and the Islamic Republic will overcome this immense loss. May God Almighty provide assistance and protection to all, and may the memory of the departed be blessed.”

“We pray to God to shower them with mercy and forgiveness and to inspire their families with patience and solace.”

“While the President of the Sovereign Council extends his sincere condolences and sympathy to the friendly Iranian people, he prays to God Almighty that the President and his companions may have mercy on him and grant their families patience and solace, expressing the solidarity of the Government of Sudan and its people with the leadership and the Iranian people in this great loss.”

“I had the honour of meeting President Raisi on the sidelines of the UN General Assembly last November.

“He exemplified a deep commitment to the welfare of his people and the dignity of his nation, which represents a proud and rich civilisation rooted in the principles of Islam.

“His dedication to justice, peace, and the uplift of the ummah was truly inspiring. We committed ourselves to bolstering Malaysia-Iran relations, working together for the betterment of our peoples and the Muslim world. Our pledge will be fulfilled.”

“I see in these hours that the Iranian authorities are crediting the thesis of the accident and not conspiracy theories.

“I do not see any changes in the internal order in Iran, we are in constant contact with our European and G7 allies because we are talking about an incident that is part of a particularly complex regional framework.

“I hope that the future Iranian leadership wants to commit itself to the stabilisation and pacification of the region.”

“The European Union expresses its sincere condolences for the death of President Raisi and Foreign Minister Abdollahian, as well as other members of their delegation and crew in a helicopter accident. Our thoughts go to the families.”

Japan expresses its deepest condolences to the government and people of Iran over the death of President Raisi and the foreign minister.

“...Deeply saddened to have to say goodbye to an exemplary person, an extraordinary leader of the world as our brother Ebrahim is, and will always be, an excellent human being, defender of the sovereignty of his people and unconditional friend of our country.

“From Bolivarian lands, we express our deepest condolences to Supreme Leader Ayatollah Ali Khamenei and wish for divine consolation for such a sensitive loss. We join the feelings of his family and our Iranian brothers and sisters in these difficult moments.”

“The president of the Arab Republic of Egypt extends his sincere condolences and sympathy to the brotherly Iranian people, and prays that the deceased Iranian President and the departed may rest in God Almighty’s mercy, and grant their families patience and solace, expressing the solidarity of the Arab Republic of Egypt with the Iranian leadership and people in this terrible incident.”

It praised the struggle of the martyrs in defending the causes of the nation and their service to Iran, calling upon God to bless them with His mercy, to protect Khamenei, and to grant Iran the ability to overcome the ordeal with patience and determination.

“My deepest condolences to the brothers, leadership, government and people of the Islamic Republic of Iran on the death of Brother President Ebrahim Raisi, Foreign Minister Brother Hossein Amir Abdullahian and those accompanying them, may God have mercy on them all.

“We stand in solidarity with our brothers in Iran in this difficult circumstance”

“Our hearts are with you in this difficult time. Our prayers are that God will cover them with His vast mercy and dwell them in His spacious Paradise.”

In a statement of condolence, Assad affirmed Syria’s solidarity with the Islamic Republic of Iran and the families of the dead, adding that Raisi’s dedication to his work and duties had taken him to East Azerbaijan to inaugurate a vital project for his country, where he was martyred in the line of duty.

Assad added that Syria had worked with the late president to ensure strategic ties between Syria and Iran remained prosperous, recalling Raisi’s important visit to Syria as part of enhancing ties for the benefit of both nations.

“We extend our heartfelt condolences and sympathies to the Supreme Leader of the Islamic Republic, Ali Khamenei, and to the nation of Iran, its government and people.

“We express our solidarity with the brotherly Iranian people and the officials of the Islamic Republic during this painful tragedy.”

It praised the deceased Iranian leaders for supporting the Palestinian cause and resistance against Israel and expressed confidence that Iran’s “deep-rooted institutions” will enable it to overcome “the repercussions of this great loss.”

MOHAMMED ALI AL-HOUTHI, HEAD OF YEMEN’S HOUTHI SUPREME REVOLUTIONARY COMMITTEE:

“We ask God to grant their families patience and solace. Verily we belong to Allah and to Him we shall return. The Iranian people will remain adhering to the loyal leaders of their people, by God’s will.”

“Sincere condolences to the government and people of the Islamic Republic of Iran...asking God Almighty for mercy and forgiveness for them and for their families with patience and solace.

“The great Iranian nation will overcome this tragedy with customary courage.

“Pakistan will observe a day of mourning and the flag will fly at half mast as a mark of respect for President Raisi and his companions and in solidarity with brotherly Iran.”

“Deeply saddened and shocked by the tragic demise of Dr. Seyed Ebrahim Raisi, president of the Islamic Republic of Iran. His contribution to strengthening India-Iran bilateral relationship will always be remembered.

“My heartfelt condolences to his family and the people of Iran. India stands with Iran in this time of sorrow.”