Sri Lanka’s Sampath Bank debentures rated ‘BBB+(EXP)(lka)’ by Fitch

ECONOMYNEXT – Fitch Ratings said it has given Sampath Bank’s proposed Sri Lankan rupee-denominated debentures a national long-term rating of ‘BBB+(EXP)(lka)’.

The Basel III-compliant subordinated debentures of up to 10 billion rupees will mature in five years, and will be listed on the Colombo Stock Exchange.

“Fitch rates the proposed Basel III Tier 2 notes two notches below the bank’s National Long-Term Rating of ‘A(lka)’,” the rating agency said.

“This reflects Fitch’s baseline notching for loss severity for this type of debt and our expectations of poor recoveries.”

Fitch Ratings – Colombo – 07 Nov 2024: Fitch Ratings has assigned Sampath Bank PLC’s (A(lka)/Stable) proposed Sri Lankan rupee-denominated Basel III-compliant subordinated debentures of up to LKR10 billion an expected National Long-Term Rating of ‘BBB+(EXP)(lka)’.

The proposed debentures, which will mature in five years, will be listed on the Colombo Stock Exchange.

The bank plans to use the proceeds to strengthen its Tier 2 capital base.

The bank expects the proposed debentures to qualify as Basel III-compliant regulatory Tier 2 capital.

The debentures include a non-viability clause whereby they will convert to ordinary voting shares subject to the occurrence of a trigger event, as determined by the regulator.

The final rating is subject to the receipt of final documentation conforming to information already received.

Fitch rates the proposed Basel III Tier 2 notes two notches below the bank’s National Long-Term Rating of ‘A(lka)’.

This reflects Fitch’s baseline notching for loss severity for this type of debt and our expectations of poor recoveries.

There is no additional notching for non-performance risks, as the proposed notes do not incorporate going-concern loss absorption features.

Sampath’s National Long-Term Rating is used as the anchor rating for this instrument because the rating reflects the bank’s standalone financial strength and best indicates the risk of the bank becoming non-viable.

For details on the key rating drivers and rating sensitivities of Sampath’s National Long Term Rating, see “Fitch Affirms Sampath Bank at ‘A(lka)’; Outlook Stable”, published on 22 July 2024.

Factors that Could, Individually or Collectively, Lead to Negative Rating Action/Downgrade

A downgrade of the bank’s National Long-Term Rating will lead to a downgrade of the expected subordinated debt rating.

Factors that Could, Individually or Collectively, Lead to Positive Rating Action/Upgrade

An upgrade of the bank’s National Long-Term Rating will lead to an upgrade of the expected subordinated debt rating. (Colombo/Nov7/2024)