The George Keyt Foundation ‘Sri Lankan Artists 2024’ exhibition returns to celebrate nation’s artistic brilliance

The long-awaited ‘Sri Lankan Artists 2024’ exhibition organized by The George Keyt Foundation will make a resounding comeback after a six-year hiatus. The grand opening will take place on 22 March 2024 at the JDA Perera Gallery in Colombo and continue until 26 March.

The George Keyt Foundation’s ‘Sri Lankan Artists 2024’ exhibition not only celebrates the nation’s artistic brilliance but also serves as a platform for nurturing and promoting emerging artists. With future plans to collaborate with the government, the exhibition aims to facilitate international exposure for Sri Lankan artists through art fairs abroad.

A highlight of the exhibition will be the unveiling of the coveted ‘Artist of the Year’ award. A remarkable number of over 60 applications were received, from which 10 exceptional artists including Asela Abeywardene, Channa Ekanayake, Chaminda Gamage, Chahturika Jayani, Dillai Joseph, Sivasubramanium Kajendran, Prageeth Ratnayake, Mohammed Thajudeen Fathima Rukshana, Pradeep Thalawatta, and W Nayanananda Wijayakulathilaka have been shortlisted to have their works prominently displayed at the exhibition.

The selection of the ‘Artist of the Year’ and the prestigious ‘Memorial Award,’ named after the Foundation’s founders Sita de Silva and Cedric de Silva, is entrusted to an independent panel of distinguished judges consisting of Palinda Kannangara, Architect, Anoma Wijewardene, Independent Artist and Orlando Edwards, Country Director British Council, Sri Lanka.

The initiative also demonstrates the Foundation’s dedication to celebrating the country’s rich cultural heritage. By providing a global platform, the Foundation seeks to elevate Sri Lankan artistic talents onto the world stage. The exhibition showcases the Foundation’s steadfast commitment to promoting the nation’s creative brilliance globally.

Gracing the event as the chief guest will be Hemantha Gunetilleke, Director and Chief Executive Officer of Nations Trust Bank PLC, the exhibition’s esteemed sponsor since its inception. The Bank, a corporate entity respected for its unwavering support in uplifting the arts in Sri Lanka, has been instrumental in ensuring the exhibition’s success.

All proceeds from the sale of artworks will directly benefit the participating artists, further emphasising the event’s commitment to fostering local talent.

Additionally, art enthusiasts and buyers will be afforded a unique opportunity to acquire desired pieces on March 22nd, before the exhibition opens to the public.

The George Keyt Foundation’s ‘Sri Lankan Artists 2024’ exhibition provides aficionados and patrons with an immersive experience showcasing the diverse and captivating expressions of Sri Lankan art.

Related Topics:The George Keyt FoundationThe George Keyt Foundation ‘Sri Lankan Artists 2024’ exhibition

Sri Lanka Insurance hosts seminar on Enhancing Law Enforcement Leadership and Communication

SLIM Kantar People’s Awards 2024 celebrates Sri Lankans’ favourite brands and personalities

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.