Ambassador Sumith Dassanayake presents credentials in Suriname

Joint Commission on Political and Economic Cooperation between the two countries in the offing

The Ambassador of Sri Lanka to the Federative Republic of Brazil, Sumith Dassanayake who  is concurrently accredited as the Ambassador of Sri Lanka to the Republic of Suriname, presented his Letters of Credence as non- resident Ambassador, to the President of the  Republic of Suriname, Chandrikapersad Santokhi at the Presidential Palace in Paramaribo recently.

The presentation of Credentials ceremony in Suriname included a guard of honour,  presentation of Credential papers to the President followed by a bilateral discussion with the  President accompanied by the Minister of Foreign Affairs of Suriname, signing the golden  book and interaction with the media.

During his meeting with the President of Suriname, Ambassador Sumith Dassanayake  conveyed greetings of President Ranil Wickremesinghe and the Government of Sri Lanka,

which was warmly reciprocated. The discussion centered on the debt re-structuring processes in Sri Lanka and Suriname, further improvement of bilateral relations between the two  countries and the significance of further cooperation at the multilateral fora, which includes at  the United Nations Human Rights Council (UNHRC) in Geneva, etc.

Ambassador Dassanyake, also had meetings with the Minister of Foreign Affairs of  Suriname, Albert R. Ramdin, and the Secretary of Foreign Affairs, Ambassador Miriam Mac Intosh. During the discussions, among other bilateral issues, the Ambassador underscored the  requirement for establishment of a Joint Commission on Political and Economic Cooperation  between the two countries. Accordingly, a draft text from Sri Lanka will be submitted for  consideration of the Government of Suriname, in due course.

Ambassador Dassanyake also had a meeting with the Chairman of the Suriname

Investment and Trade Agency (SITA) Henk-John Guicherit and discussed on trade and  economic cooperation between Sri Lanka and Suriname.

Addressing the media, Ambassador Dassanayake highlighted on the progress of

relations between Sri Lanka and Suriname since establishment of diplomatic relations in 2012  and also the availability of opportunities for business community in Suriname and other  South American countries in Sri Lanka, which includes possible investments in  Pharmaceutical zone in Hambantota, Textile zones in Eravur and Batticaloa, BOI Industrial  zones, IT based development projects, Hospitality and leisure sector projects, Colombo Port  City project, Mixed Development projects etc.

The Ambassador also highlighted on the goods and services that could offer to South America from Sri Lanka vis-a-vis Ceylon Tea, Cinnamon, Spices, Garments, Rubber products and IT Services etc.