Sampath Bank recognized at the ACCA Sri Lanka sustainability reporting awards 2023

Sampath Bank was adjudged as the Runner Up in the Banking Category at the prestigious ACCA Sri Lanka Sustainability Awards 2023. The awards ceremony, organised by the Association of Chartered Certified Accountants (ACCA), Sri Lanka, took place on 20th February 2024 at the Hilton Residencies in Colombo.

Since 2004, ACCA Sri Lanka has striven to reward and recognize those organizations, giving credence to their sustainability practices with recognition of the strong link between business strategy, corporate governance, and sustainability.

The evaluation process leading to Sampath Bank’s Runner Up position involved a thorough assessment by an expert panel of judges. The report submitted by the bank was meticulously reviewed based on three main criteria such as Completeness, Credibility, and Communication.

Ayodhya Iddawela Perera, Managing Director of Sampath Bank PLC, expressed her pride in the bank’s commitment to sustainability, stating, “Sustainability has always been among the core ethos of Sampath Bank which have certainly been integral to our success over the years. Accolades such as this push us to move even further in our strife to achieve excellence in our growth and performance, while maintaining the right balance between stakeholder expectations. We are also thankful for ACCA’s efforts to encourage sustainability reporting which have played a pivotal role in highlighting the need for socially and environmentally responsible business practices in the country.”

SLT-MOBITEL teams up with BaseKit Platform UK to launch new web builder ‘CubKit’ empowering Lankan SMEs

Sampath Bank achieves stable results amidst economic headwinds, while supporting the sustainability of its customers.

Sampath Bank completes 20th restoration under ‘Wewata Jeewayak’ by rejuvenating Kidachchoori Tank in Vavuniya, handing over to the community on Thai Pongal Day

Sampath Bank gears up for the future amidst economic challenges

Sampath Bank gears up for the future amidst economic challenges

Sampath Bank partners with BOI and Investment Promotion Min to launch ‘Sri Lanka’s Banking Guide for Investors & BOI Companies’

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.