Cabinet clears construction of three new fuel storage tanks at Muthurajawela

Approves awarding contract worth $ 3.04 m, Rs. 2.8 b to Indo-East Engineering and Construction (Lanka) Ltd., and Ceylex Engineering Ltd., joint venture

The Cabinet of Ministers approved the award of a contract for the construction of three new fuel storage tanks at the Muthurajawela Terminal, with the project to be funded through the Ceylon Petroleum Terminal Company (CPSTL).

The project involves the construction of two fuel storage tanks with a capacity of 15,000 cubic metres each and one tank with a capacity of 10,000 cubic metres.

The Cabinet had previously approved the project at its meeting on 2 June 2025. However, at a subsequent meeting held on 20 July 2026, the Cabinet directed the Energy Minister and the Environment Minister to consult relevant stakeholders and determine the measures required to ensure compliance with environmental, legal and other requirements before proceeding with the project.

Following those consultations, the Energy Minister and Environment Minister informed the Cabinet that the recommendations and conditions imposed by the Central Environmental Authority (CEA) had been incorporated into the procurement contract.

The Ministers also confirmed that the project would be implemented in accordance with the provisions of the Fauna and Flora Protection Ordinance, ensuring that the necessary environmental and wildlife-related requirements are observed.

Based on these assurances, the Cabinet of Ministers approved a proposal submitted by the Energy Minister Anura Karunathilake to award the contract to Indo-East Engineering & Construction (Lanka) Ltd., and Ceylex Engineering Ltd., joint venture.

The approved contract is valued at $ 3.04 million, (excluding VAT), and Rs. 2,796.14 million (excluding VAT).

“The joint venture was identified as the lowest bidder recommended by the High-Level Procurement Committee following an International Competitive Bidding process,” Cabinet Spokesman and Minister Dr. Nalinda Jayatissa said at the weekly post-Cabinet meeting media briefing yesterday.

He said the investment is expected to expand fuel storage capacity at the Muthurajawela Terminal and strengthen the country’s petroleum storage infrastructure.