India extends Rs. 600 m Grant Assistance for supply of medical equipment to Deniyaya Base Hospital

A Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) for Supply of Medical Equipment to Base Hospital, Deniyaya was signed by High Commissioner of India to Sri Lanka Santosh Jha, and Secretary to Ministry of Health and Mass Media, Dr. Anil Jasinghe, on 13 July 2026. The signing ceremony was graced by the Health and Mass Media Minister (Dr.) Nalinda Jayatissa.

Under this MoU, Government of India will provide grant assistance of Rs.  600 million to equip Deniyaya hospital, which is being relocated by Government of Sri Lanka as a comprehensive disaster preparedness measure due to its current location in a disaster-prone area. The relocation of hospital is projected for completion within three years, with delivery and installation of equipment aligned with the final phases of construction.

The project forms part of $ 450 million assistance package announced by Government of India for reconstruction and rehabilitation measures in Sri Lanka post-Cyclone Ditwah.

The grant project encompasses the procurement of state-of-the art medical equipment across multiple critical departments, including general wards, High Dependency Units (HDU), emergency and isolation units, operating theaters, Out-Patient Departments (OPD), laboratories, Central Sterile Supply Department (CSSD), radiology, blood bank, physiotherapy unit, and Special Care Baby Unit (SCBU)/Neonatal Intensive Care Unit (NICU).

The cooperation in health sector remains a key pillar in the robust India-Sri Lanka development partnership. The landmark initiatives in this sector include the island-wide 990 Suwa Seriya ambulance service, construction of multi-specialty hospital in Dickoya, construction of surgical unit at Batticaloa Teaching hospital, upgrading of Jaffna Teaching Hospital and district hospitals in Kilinochchi and Mullaitivu. Ongoing collaborations also include construction and supply of medical equipment for Accident and Emergency Unit at District General Hospital in Mannar and construction of a four-storied medical ward complex at District General Hospital in Mullaitivu.