ITC Hotels appoints Keenan McKenzie Area Manager – Sri Lanka and General Manager of Colombo’s ITC Ratnadipa

Indian hospitality leader ITC Hotels announced the appointment of Keenan McKenzie as Area Manager – Sri Lanka and General Manager of ITC Ratnadipa, Colombo. In this expanded capacity, Keenan will oversee the entire operations of ITC Ratnadipa, a Luxury Collection Hotel, while also supporting the leadership of WelcomHotels Lanka (Pvt.) Ltd., a fully owned subsidiary of ITC Hotels in Sri Lanka, in driving growth.

Keenan brings over two decades of leadership experience in the luxury hospitality sector to his new role. Having successfully steered ITC Narmada – a Luxury Collection Hotel in Ahmedabad – to new heights, he has demonstrated exceptional operational expertise in managing world-class properties and delivering superior guest experiences in competitive and diverse markets. His extensive career also includes key management roles across major ITC hotels such as ITC Kakatiya, WelcomHotel Grand Bay, ITC Rajputana, ITC Sonar and ITC Maratha, equipping him with a deep understanding of operations and brand excellence.

Reflecting on his new role, Keenan stated, “ITC Ratnadipa is more than just a hotel, it is a symbol of Responsible Luxury and a testament to Sri Lanka’s rich culture and resilience. This island holds extraordinary promise, and I see immense opportunity to create meaningful experiences that truly celebrate that spirit. It’s an honour to continue the incredible work begun by my team here, and together, we aim to elevate ITC Ratnadipa even further, as a beacon of warmth, elegance, and innovation in Colombo’s hospitality landscape.”

Under Keenan’s leadership, ITC Hotels anticipates further growth and operational excellence at ITC Ratnadipa, reinforcing its standing as a premier luxury hotel. His strategic vision and collaborative approach are vital strengths that will drive continued success in delivering unparalleled guest experiences and sustaining ITC Hotels’ legacy of Responsible Luxury in Sri Lanka.

Sri Lanka’s investment trajectory under the spotlight at SLEIS 2025

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.