ComBank supports preschool education in collaboration with UNICEF

Demonstrating its continuing commitment to education, the Commercial Bank of Ceylon recently handed over the fully refurbished Muthukumarana Preschool at Madagama in the Monaragala District, under a partnership with UNICEF to uplift the standard of preschool education in Sri Lanka.

The handover marks the successful completion of the Bank’s contribution to the UNICEF-led project titled ‘Reaching the most marginalized with quality preschool education – Enabling all children in Sri Lanka to play, learn, and reach their full potential.’ This initiative focuses on enhancing access to safer, more equitable, and quality early learning environments for children in remote communities.

Present at the ceremony from Commercial Bank were the Regional Manager – Uva Sabaragamuwa Region, Chamenda Kalugamage, and the Branch Manager – Monaragala, Upali Marasinghe. Representing UNICEF were the Chief of Communication, Advocacy and Partnerships, Bismarck Swangin, and the Education Officer, Sugath Adikaram.

Commercial Bank’s contribution enabled the complete refurbishment of the school’s physical infrastructure and the provision of quality furniture and age-appropriate learning materials, creating a child-friendly environment conducive to learning through play.

The broader objectives of the project include improving the quality of preschool education through capacity building for teachers, increasing awareness among parents and caregivers, and strengthening collaboration with local and national stakeholders to ensure sustainability.

This effort builds on UNICEF’s work since 2022 in partnership with the Provincial Offices of Uva and Central, which has already supported the rehabilitation of 40 preschools in underserved regions. Commercial Bank’s involvement is an example of private-public collaboration to address educational disparities in early childhood.

Dialog, HNB General Insurance launch parametric insurance for fishermen via Sayuru App

HNB Assurance ranked among Lanka’s top 40 best workplaces by Great Place to Work

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.