Sri Lanka moves closer to ‘Starlink’ implementation: TRCSL prepares for crucial talks

The Telecommunication Regulatory Commission of Sri Lanka (TRCSL) is expected to meet next week for further discussions pertaining to the formal authorization and implementation of the “Starlink” service in Sri Lanka, the State Minister of Technology Kanaka Herath says.

Speaking to Ada Derana, the State Minister who stated that no company of this nature operates in Sri Lanka so far, also highlighted that steps are being taken to explore the regulations and the legal framework required to facilitate its operations.

The State Minister further said: “We will be looking at the nature of the license that will be granted to Starlink. The Telecommunication Regulatory Commission will be meeting next week.”

“The commission’s final decision will be presented to the president”, he added.

Speaking regarding the matter last week, President Ranil Wickremesinghe stated that the initiative of integrating the global ‘Starlink’ network with Sri Lanka aims to address the Wi-Fi connectivity issues, particularly in areas outside Colombo.

Furthermore, Wickremesinghe revealed that the Telecommunication Regulatory Commission of Sri Lanka (TRCSL) has been tasked with assessing the ‘Starlink’ network, with most of the preliminary work already completed.

President Wickremesinghe met with billionaire investor Elon Musk on the sidelines of the 10th World Water Forum High-Level Meeting being held in Indonesia on May 19, during which they have discussed the implementation of ‘Starlink’ in Sri Lanka.

Musk was in Indonesia’s resort island of Bali to launch Starlink satellite internet service in the world’s largest archipelago nation.

The billionaire head of Tesla and SpaceX and owner of social platform X had launched the service alongside Indonesian President Joko Widodo in a ceremony at a public health clinic in Denpasar, the provincial capital of Bali.

Unlike traditional telecommunications providers, which prioritise the most populated urban areas, Starlink aims to provide global coverage, extending internet connectivity to even the most remote corners of the planet.

Starlink can provide internet access to virtually any location on Earth with a constellation of LEO satellites that can be re-positioned at any point, and according to experts, reliable internet access is possible, whether the user operates in the Congo, the Arctic, or on an oil rig located hundreds of miles offshore.

So far, Starlink has more than 02 million active customers and is available on all seven continents and in over 60 countries.