Sri Lanka automotive sector group explore Thailand business opportunities

ECONOMYNEXT – Representatives from nine Sri Lankan automotive sector companies visited Thailand recently on an exposure and study tour, to explore business opportunities and strategies for entering the Thai automotive market.

This was organized by the Export Development Board, the Sri Lanka Embassy in Thailand, the Sri Lanka Automobile Component Manufacturers Association, and the Thai-Sri Lanka Chamber of Commerce.

“The main objective of the program was to enhance participants’ knowledge of the automotive components sector while providing exposure to emerging market trends and potential business opportunities,” the EDB said in a statement.

The group toured key automotive industry sites, including the SAIC Motor – MG car manufacturing plant.

“The visit provided firsthand insights into vehicle assembly technologies, including electric, hybrid, and conventional vehicles. Participants observed advanced machinery and assembly lines with an annual production capacity exceeding 40,000 units.”

They also visited Siam NSK Steering Systems Co Ltd where they gained exposure on steering system manufacturing technologies, EDB said.

“They learned about advanced machinery, innovative manufacturing techniques, and defect inspection processes used in the factory.”

The group visited the wire harness manufacturing plant of Dashing International, which specializes in heavy vehicle wire harness production, and explored new technologies, injection moulding processes, tools, and machinery.

They also discussed potential supply opportunities for Sri Lankan products with company representatives.

“At the Thai Smile Group, the delegation studied the production of electric buses and electric boats, including EV transportation control systems. The company operates over 2,500 buses in Bangkok and manages a fleet of EV boats they manufacture.

“Delegation studied the monitoring system of EV buses using AI technology and possibilities of introducing similar system to Sri Lanka.

The team also visited the Thai government-owned Thailand Automotive Institute, where they observed automotive component testing methods. The institute expressed its willingness to provide technical support to assist in developing Sri Lanka’s automotive industry.

They explored Worachak Market and Poonsup Market, two key after-sales auto parts markets in Thailand, where they observed product quality standards, pricing, and potential entry points into the value chain, the EDB said. (Colombo/Dec20/2024)