CPM Sri Lanka officially launches ‘Chartered Professional Manager’ programme

The Institute of Chartered Professional Managers of Sri Lanka (CPM Sri Lanka) launched its new “Chartered Professional Manager” program in response to the growing demand for skilled management professionals. The official launch was held on 7th November at 6.00 p.m., at the Atrium Lobby of Cinnamon Grand Hotel, Colombo, attracting prominent figures and leading professionals from the industry.

The event commenced with a welcome address by Professor Lakshman R. Watawala, Founder and President of CPM Sri Lanka. The Chief Guest and the Keynote Speaker of the event Dr. Ravi Fernando, CEO and Global Strategic Corporate Sustainability Executive in Residence at the Social Innovation Center of INSEAD Business School in France, delivered the keynote address titled “The Importance of a Professional Management Qualification.” In his presentation, Dr. Fernando underscored the significance of acquiring proven management skills and experience through education and training to cultivate future-ready managers who possess the necessary knowledge for leadership roles in the C-suite. Additionally, Dr. Samantha Rathnayake, Chairman of the Education and Research Development Committee and a member of the Governing Council of CPM Sri Lanka, provided a comprehensive overview of the Chartered Professional Manager’s Professional Programme.

This professional program offers an in-depth syllabus and a robust grading framework to prepare participants with the advanced management capabilities needed in today’s competitive job market. It aims to support young professionals, graduates, and undergraduates who aspire to excel in management roles and ultimately attain positions within the C-suite.

CPM Sri Lanka’s international recognition extends to its active membership in the prestigious Association of Management Development Institutions in South Asia (AMDISA) and the Indian Institute of Ahmadabad (IIMA) and Management Institute of Malaysia (MIM) thereby cementing its position on the global stage.

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.