Assetline Finance awarded ISO 14064 certification for Greenhouse Gas emissions verification

Assetline Finance Limited (AFL), the financial services arm of the David Pieris Group, achieved a significant sustainability milestone by obtaining independent verification of its Greenhouse Gas (GHG) emissions inventory in accordance with ISO 14064-1:2018. The verification covers Scope 1, Scope 2, and Scope 3 emissions, including financed emissions. The certification was formally presented at a ceremony held at the Ministry of Environment, Battaramulla, on December 30, 2025.

While upholding AFL’s sustainability credentials at a national level, ISO 14064-1:2018 certification confirms that AFL’s greenhouse gas emissions have been independently quantified and verified in accordance with internationally recognised standard for GHG accounting and reporting.

The verification covers Scope 1 – Direct emissions from owned and controlled sources, Scope 2 – Indirect emissions from purchased electricity and energy consumption and Scope 3 – Indirect emissions across the value chain, including employee commuting, waste disposal etc.

“This milestone positions AFL as a forward-looking financial institution that proactively aligns its sustainability practices with the CBSL Roadmap and globally accepted standards. It also contributes meaningfully to Sri Lanka’s transition towards a low-carbon and sustainable economy, supporting the nation’s ambition to achieve net zero carbon emissions by 2050.” Says Ashan Nissanka Director and Chief Executive Officer of Assetline Finance.

The certificate was officially handed over by the Deputy Minister of Environment to AFL’s Director and Chief Executive Officer, Ashan Nissanka, in the presence of senior government officials and other stakeholders. This achievement marks a significant milestone in AFL’s sustainability journey and demonstrates strong alignment with the Central Bank of Sri Lanka’s (CBSL) Roadmap for Sustainable Finance.

The verified GHG statement, issued by the Sri Lanka Climate Fund under the Ministry of Environment, confirms AFL’s total emissions for the assessment period from April 1, 2024, to March 31, 2025. The verification was conducted in accordance with ISO 14064-1:2018, covering AFL’s head office and 61 branches.

Achieving certification across all three emission scopes reflects AFL’s robust governance framework and its integrated approach to sustainability, risk management, and operational oversight. This initiative supports CBSL’s guidance for financial institutions to identify, measure, monitor, and manage climate-related and environmental risks within business models.

Obtaining ISO 14064-1:2018 verification will be a strategic enabler that strengthens transparency, data integrity, and climate resilience. It also reinforces AFL’s commitment towards consistent environmental stewardship, and long-term value creation with sustainability as a core factor, adds Mr Nissanka in conclusion.

Charles Sturt University – Colombo advances Sri Lanka’s higher education agenda with high-level roundtable

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.