NCE Kurunegala visit – Meeting with aspiring exporters at EDB

The North Western Provincial Office of the Sri Lanka Export Development Board (EDB) successfully organised a networking meeting with the delegation of the National Chamber of Exporters of Sri Lanka (NCE) and potential exporters on 15 May 2026 in Kurunegala. The event was conducted as a parallel session to the B2B forum hosted by Industrial Services Bureau (ISB) – Kurunegala.

The primary objective of the meeting was to facilitate networking and collaboration opportunities between the NCE delegation and potential exporters, including export-ready entrepreneurs in the North Western Province (NWP). The programme also aimed to establish stronger supply chain linkages between leading exporters and local producers and suppliers within the province.

The event brought together members of the NCE delegation and aspiring exporters from the NWP, including start-ups and non-regular exporters, to discuss their export journeys, current market positions, and future business prospects. The session also provided an opportunity for participants to gain valuable knowledge and insights from established exporters, enabling them to strengthen and expand their export activities.

The meeting was attended by the NCE President Indhra Kaushal Rajapaksa, and the Secretary General/Chief Executive Officer Shiham Marikar accompanied by representatives of member organisations comprising established exporters and key service sector stakeholders, including logistics providers, financial institutions, insurance companies, certification bodies, and port terminal operators etc.

During the discussions, the NCE delegation expressed appreciation for the diverse range of exportable products available within the province and agreed to share the product and company profiles of participating businesses among its membership network of over 600 members to facilitate potential business linkages with exporters. The delegation also encouraged participants to obtain NCE membership under the Aspiring Exporters program currently being implemented by the Chamber. Through Aspiring Exporters program, the NCE aims to promote the products of aspiring exporters among both local and international buyers while empowering entrepreneurs by developing the capacity and skills required to access export markets with the guidance and support of established exporters.

This initiative aligns with the ongoing efforts of the EDB to promote export-oriented enterprises and enhance their contribution to national exports and the collaboration between the EDB and the NCE reflects a shared commitment to strengthening Sri Lankan exporters through strategic institutional partnerships and sustainable Export Development initiatives.