Dayasiri refutes rumours of SLFP-SJB agreement

SLFP Dayasiri Jayasekara denies he has been in talks with SJB and says no agreement will be signed on 8 Aug.

Says SLFP has decided to appoint a 10-member committee to determine party’s plans

Stresses party has not decided which candidate to support in upcoming Presidential poll

Sri Lanka Freedom Party (SLFP) General Secretary Dayasiri Jayasekara has refuted claims that the party will sign an agreement with the Samagi Jana Balawegaya (SJB) on 8 August.

At a press conference held yesterday, Jayasekara also dismissed rumours that he had been in talks with the SJB regarding backing SJB leader Sajith Premadasa’s Presidential bid.

Jayasekara was responding to questions posed by media personnel regarding former SLFP Chairperson Maithripala Sirisena’s challenge for Jayasekara to disclose the specifics of an alleged agreement between the SLFP and SJB to support the SJB in the upcoming Presidential election.

According to the SLFP General Secretary, all electoral and district organisers of the party met over the weekend and decided to appoint a 10-member committee to determine the party’s future plans, policies, and programs.

“We have agreed to discuss the committee’s proposals and then come to a final decision on the SLFP’s way forward. At the moment, we have not decided on whom to support in the upcoming Presidential poll. Protecting the party’s dignity and its members has become a challenge,” he said.

“I deny any discussion was held with the SJB. I am not a liar. We have never discussed supporting, crossing over, or aligning the SLFP with another party. We are also ready to support any party member who wishes to contest in the upcoming Presidential election,” he added.

He emphasised that the internal crisis within the party must be resolved before anything else. “I cannot make decisions on behalf of the party. There will be no signing of an agreement on 8 August as alleged by Sirisena,” he said.

While Sirisena has extended his support to Justice Minister Wijeyadasa Rajapakse’s candidacy under the SLFP ticket, Jayasekara expressed his disapproval, noting that Rajapakse’s SLFP membership is still in question.

“We have not approved support for Ranil Wickremesinghe, the SJB, or the SLPP. We will see which camp aligns with the SLFP’s policies,” Jayasekara said.

He also urged party organisers and members not to attend meetings convened by Sirisena, emphasising that he is the only office-bearer authorised to convene party meetings at this time.