Sysco LABS Sri Lanka appoints  Thushera Kawdawatta as Managing Director

Sysco LABS Sri Lanka, the largest Global Innovation Center (GIC) of the world leader in food service, said it has appointed Thushera Kawdawatta as Managing Director.

Commenting on the appointment, Sysco Executive Vice President and Chief Information and Digital Officer Tom Peck said: “We are proud to welcome Thushera to lead Sysco LABS Sri Lanka into its next phase of growth. Thushera’s forward-looking approach to business and technology, and responsible AI adoption, aligns perfectly with our ambitions. Sysco LABS’ depth of expertise and engagement are integral to our global success, and this appointment underscores our continued commitment to Sri Lanka.”

Kawdawatta is an industry veteran with nearly three decades of experience, who is recognised for his thoughtful leadership in AI, large-scale technology strategy and enterprise transformation. His career spans senior leadership roles at global and regional technology firms, including Virtusa, and as the founding CEO of Axiata Digital Labs. Most recently, he served as CEO and Chief AI Officer at COHEAD Therapeutics.

“I am excited to join Sysco LABS, where my vision is to harness Sri Lankan ingenuity to drive even greater value for Sysco,” Kawdawatta said. “Guided by our purpose of ‘connecting the world to share food and care for one another,’ I am committed to investing in our people and cultivating a thriving workforce that will use innovation and tech-driven mindsets to impact the global food service industry.”

“As our largest GIC, Sysco LABS Sri Lanka plays a pivotal role in advancing Sysco’s global technology strategy. Thushera’s technical expertise and people-first leadership style will strengthen our ability to scale capabilities, foster innovation and create an environment where top talent thrives,” said Sysco Vice President of Technology, Enterprise Solutions, Global Centers and OCIDO Lise Monahan.

Kawdawatta holds an MSc in Information Technology from Keele University and has completed executive leadership programs at the Indian Institute of Management Ahmedabad and Harvard Business School.