Three years of R&D by Velona Cuddles yield alcohol-free baby care range

Velona Cuddles, a renowned baby care brand, launched what is touted as the safest baby care range in the country at an event held last Friday at Cinnamon Lakeside. This new line of alcohol-free, pH 5.5 baby care products complements Velona Cuddles Diapers, celebrated as the world’s first diaper range, free of harsh chemicals.

Dr. Gehan De Soysa, chairman and CEO of the Velona Group of Companies, stressed at the launch that these alcohol-free baby care products are the result of three years of rigorous research and development, drawing inspiration from leading European baby care brands,, such as Sebamed and Mustela.

Dr. De Soysa emphasized: “We are dedicated to providing parents with safe, non-irritating products that promote comfort for their babies. Many baby care products on the market contain harmful chemicals and irritants, which is concerning. Our mission was to develop products that are free from such chemicals, particularly alcohol, which can dry and irritate delicate skin, strip natural oils, and potentially cause painful rashes. With our groundbreaking research and development, parents can now opt for gentle, alcohol-free products that promote healthy skin and a happy baby.”

He further stated that Velona Cuddles’ products are designed to offer optimal care for babies without exposing them to harmful chemicals. “We believe every baby deserves to grow up healthy and happy,” he added.

Speaking to The Island Financial Review, Dr. De Soysa responded to our queries:

‘I (Dr. Gehan De Soysa), am always in search for the best and safest for the babies in Sri Lanka, and that’s how the Velona Cuddles diapers also came in as an initiative sometime back. This is also such a thought of mine- with the passion for ensuring that parents have safe, non-irritating and comfort-promoting products for their babies and children.

‘The amount of potentially harmful chemicals and irritants found in many baby care products in the market today is disturbing. That’s why, we set out to engineer products that are free from such chemicals, especially alcohol – as it dries and irritates delicate skin, stripping natural oils and potentially causing painful rashes. Now, thanks to our game-changing research and development, parents can opt for gentle, alcohol-free products for healthy skin and a happy baby.

Are there any plans to expand into overseas markets, particularly the Middle East?

Yes, we do. Velona Cuddles is already available in a range of overseas markets such as Australia, Indonesia, Kiribati, Mongolia, Malaysia, the Maldives, Canada, Qatar and Vietnam. We have also secured international trademarks in USA, India, Australia, China, Kenya, Vietnam and UAE.

Therefore, this range will also surely be made available in other markets also very soon, and we are sure that the products will be embraced and accepted by those markets also, just as they accepted our diapers. Alcohol- free products are a need in those markets as well, so we firmly believe that we can win those markets as well with our new range of baby care products.

We do have a lot. And the main is our exclusive biodegradable premium bamboo diaper and bamboo water wipes. These diapers are 75% bio-degradable, made from organic bamboo fibres and decompose in soil by micro-organisms and sunlight in just 75 days.

We have also won awards for Best Eco Focused Organisation – FMCG, and Best Eco Product – FMCG at the ACEF Asian Leader Forum & Awards for our initiatives in sustainability and eco-friendliness.

Over that eight decades, Velona has consistently prioritised the health and well-being of children. Velona is synonymous with safety, comfort, and durability, earning trust through high- quality products. Expanding into hygiene and pharmaceutical sectors, we uphold our commitment to innovation and premium quality.

We are a company that meets and exceeds the expectations of consumers. We shall continue to introduce new products to the Sri Lankan market as well as that of the global that will surely help them to upgrade their lifestyles. Under the baby care range also, different products will come in future as a result of our extensive research and development and commitment to quality.

A new institutional framework to enhance Sri Lanka’s industrial sector

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.