TISL launches research report on Sri Lanka’s  private sector corruption risks

ECONOMYNEXT – Transparency International Sri Lanka (TISL) unveiled the ‘Corruption Risk Mapping Research: A Study on Sri Lanka’s Private Sector’ on Thursday (12) in Colombo, presenting an in-depth analysis of corruption risks.

It also provides possible measures to address the corruption in Sri Lanka’s private sector.

“The research, compiled by an independent researcher documents and narrates alleged experiences and examples of private sector corruption, possibly for the first time in Sri Lanka,” the TISL said in a statement.

“Corruption in Sri Lanka for the most part has been seen as a public sector problem. This research, however, indicates that the private sector often functions as the “supply side” of corruption.”

”The allegations narrated showed a high risk of corruption when dealing with relevant government departments for approvals and licences across all industries.”

The report also has documented allegations of corruption when bidding for government contracts, particularly in relation to pharmaceuticals and large-scale infrastructure projects.

The report comes under a new government which has been strongly backing anti-corruption measures.

“Allegations of corruption documented in the report between private sector entities includes kickbacks, gratifications and favours, fraud, unethical manipulation of procurement processes, conflicts of interest, nepotism and favouritism,” the TISL said.

“Interestingly, the research also revealed allegations of private sector entities engaging in political lobbying and significant market manipulation through the creation of monopolies.”

“The research showed that gender dynamics also affected the nature of corruption. Respondents alleged that women were at a higher risk of being solicited for sexual bribes in exchange for jobs, promotions or even to provide a service.”

The report has highlighted while public listed companies are heavily regulated, their unlisted subsidiaries face fewer regulations.

“This enables the parent company to outsource their corruption to a subsidiary or sub-subsidiary.”

“The Report identifies the lack of a strong regulator, internal controls, and regular financial and social audits as some of the risk factors that lead to private sector corruption.”

“It has also been found that new market entrants often resort to corruption as a means of survival in the absence of a conducive business environment.”

The report has proposed the private sector to adopt robust anti-bribery and corruption policies with whistle-blower protection, and to pursue collective action to mitigate corruption.

It has called on the Government to establish stronger regulatory bodies, digitalize processes, and enhance procurement practices. (Colombo/December 12/2024)