Govt. considers reviewing security allocations  for Ex-Presidents

Cabinet Spokesman Minister Vijitha Herath clarifies no reduction in security details has occurred yet, countering claims by former President Kumaratunga

Reveals some Ex-Presidents’ security details of over 100 personnel, total costing tops Rs. 1.1 b annually

Says Govt. will disclose details on firearms returned by former MPs; future firearms distribution will follow stricter guidelines

Cabinet Spokesman and Minister Vijitha Herath yesterday announced that the Government is considering revising the security detail provided to former Presidents, a move prompted by significant budget pressures.

Refuting claims that security for former leaders had already been reduced, he clarified that no changes have yet been implemented.

Responding to questions raised at the weekly post-Cabinet meeting media briefing yesterday, he noted that a committee is currently reviewing the matter, and a decision will be made following its recommendations.

“Contrary to recent statements, including those by former President Chandrika Bandaranaike Kumaratunga, no reduction in security has been made,” Herath said, dismissing her claim as unfounded.

He affirmed that Kumaratunga currently retains a detail of 57 personnel, while former Presidents overall are assigned over 100 security personnel each, including vehicles and ambulances.

“The maintenance of security details for former heads of State costs Rs. 1.1 billion annually, an amount greater than allocations made to the Sri Lanka Police Hospital to procure drugs for the year,” he said.

Herath said the Government is assessing how best to allocate resources, balancing necessary security for former leaders with budgetary responsibility.

The Spokesman also said that the Government will soon release all details regarding the firearms returned by former MPs as the deadline ends today (7).

The Defence Ministry revealed that a total of 1,690 firearms had been issued over time for the protection of 1,500 individuals. “Moving forward, firearms will only be issued based on a more systematic approach,” Herath said.