People’s Bank celebrates 76 years of Independence by offering gifts to newborns

People’s Bank celebrated Sri Lanka’s 76thNational Independence at a modest ceremony held at their Head Office which was followed by a series of island wide initiatives.

People’s Bank’s ‘Birth of Freedom’ programme which commences on every Independence Day was carried out this year as well. Under this concept, People’s Bank gifts Rs.2,000/- worth of an ‘Isuru Udana’ Gift Certificate to every baby born between the 1st and 14th of February.

People’s Bank launched this programme in 2006 with the vision of instilling national pride and encouraging parents to plan for their children’s future. Parents or guardians can open an ‘Isuru Udana’ Children’s Savings Account at any People’s Bank branch using the gift certificate along with the child’s birth certificate. The specialty of this programme is that the staff of People’s Bank visits the hospitals and gifts the certificates to the newborns in person.

People’s Bank Chairman Sujeewa Rajapakse symbolically presented ‘Isuru Udana’ gift vouchers and other gifts at the Castle Street Hospital for Women and De Soysa Hospital for Women in Borella.

In addition, People’s Bank handed over a cheque to facilitate the renovation of sanitary facilities at Castle Street for Women.

Director of the Castle Street Hospital for Women, Dr. Ajith Danthanarayana, Deputy Director of De Soysa Hospital for Women in Borella, Dr. K.M Nihal along with hospital staff, senior management staff of People’s Bank and other staff members were also present at the event.

In line with the above all People’s Bank branches across the country initiated ‘Nidahase Upatha’ activities island wide.

SEC Sri Lanka introduces mechanism to report social media wrongdoings

Prime Group felicitates MAGA Engineering for successful completion of ‘The Grand’ project

People’s Bank and George Steuart Solutions join forces to promote solar energy in Sri Lanka

People’s Bank, one of the most awarded Sri Lankan banks in 2023

People’s Bank becomes one of the Most Awarded Sri Lankan Banks in 2023

People’s Bank’s ‘Mahajana Mehewara’ uplifts seven under-resourced schools through solar power electricity

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.