Rupee’s tumble

The depreciation of the rupee continues, and the government is accused of making only half-hearted attempts to arrest it. The UNP has said the country is facing a very serious issue due to the uncontrolled tumble of the rupee, and during the 20 months since the current administration assumed office, the exchange rate has moved from around Rs. 292 at the time former President Ranil Wickremesinghe handed over office to around Rs. 354 against the US dollar. It has attributed the current situation to the JVP-NPP government’s failure to continue economic policies introduced by the previous administration and pointed to what it describes as a lack of a clear economic plan and failure to strengthen foreign reserves. According to the UNP, these factors have contributed to the rising value of the US dollar. The SLPP-UNP government was lucky that it did not face a global oil price hike and increasing shipping costs.

However, the Joint Apparel Association Forum (JAAF) has argued that the depreciation of the Sri Lankan rupee should be examined in the context of global pressures, such as increasing world oil prices and shipping costs. The rupee depreciation should not be interpreted as a sign that Sri Lanka’s economy is underperforming, JAAF has said. It has been pointed out that the Sri Lankan rupee has depreciated by 4.8% against the US dollar, the Indian rupee by 6.4%, the Nepalese rupee by 6.2% and the Indonesian rupiah by 5.2%.

The JAAF statement reflects the global economic reality, but Sri Lanka’s situation is more serious than that in many other countries. Sri Lanka is still recovering from an economic crisis. The government will have to go beyond imposing a 50% customs duty surcharge on vehicle imports to curtail the forex outflow, strengthen the rupee and shore up foreign currency reserves.

President Anura Kumara Dissanayake has urged the public to cut down on fuel consumption and help boost the country’s foreign currency reserves and arrest the rapid depreciation of the rupee. But they have already cut down on fuel consumption due to soaring oil prices.

President Dissanayake has claimed that a litre of diesel costs as much a Rs. 720, and a government subsidy on diesel amounts to Rs. 100 a litre. If a litre of diesel costs Rs. 720, as the President claims, are the private fuel retailers incurring huge losses by selling diesel at the current price (Rs. 392 a litre)? Is the Ceylon Petroleum Corporation overpaying for fuel? The increasing national fuel bill and the country’s forex woes cannot be blamed on the fallout from the West Asia crisis alone. True, the Iran conflict and the closure of the Hormuz chokepoint have driven the world oil prices up. However, the huge rise in Sri Lanka’s fuel bill from USD 98 million in February to a projected USD 522 million in May, as the President says, is also due to a massive increase in the use of diesel, etc., to operate the oil-fired power plants to compensate for the generation loss caused by substandard coal at the Norochcholai power complex.

With the government struggling to maintain an uninterrupted power supply by burning costly diesel, scheduled power cuts may not be far away. The Opposition has told Parliament that unofficial power cuts are already underway.

The national fuel bill no doubt must be curtailed, but there are other avenues that the government should explore to arrest the rupee’s tumble. Exporters have gained from the depreciation of the rupee, which they themselves have to take responsibility for to some extent. It has been alleged that Sri Lanka is deprived of most export proceeds due to various rackets. Exporters unlawfully park foreign exchange abroad. This practice is linked to exchange control violations, tax evasion, capital flight and, in some cases, even trade-based money laundering. Common methods used by unscrupulous exporters to avoid the repatriation of most export proceeds include the following as we have reported over the years, quoting experts: under-invoicing exports, over-invoicing imports, keeping proceeds abroad through offshore entities, use of “open account” arrangements, multiple invoicing and phantom shipments. Some fraudsters use hawala or informal settlement systems. The media has exposed these malpractices over the years, but in vain.

These export-related rackets have prompted many countries to require exporters to repatriate export proceeds within a relatively short period, submit shipping and banking documentation, and convert part or all export earnings into local currency. Sri Lanka has adopted some of these methods but no government has had the courage to go the whole hog to ensure compliance, for exporters have huge slush funds to bankroll election campaigns. The JVP-NPP government must get tough with the errant exporters who resort to malpractices and deprive the country of much-needed forex. Ensuring the repatriation of export proceeds in a proper manner is half the battle in breaking the back of the forex problem.

The need for a holistic approach to rupee depreciation cannot be overstated, but stringent measures are necessary to curb the outflow of foreign currency.

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.