Pandemonium as opposition says Sri Lanka online law changes not in line with SC order

ECONOMYNEXT – Sri Lanka ruling party legislators formed a ring around chief government whip Susil Premjayntha amid strong protests from the opposition that revisions to a controversial online speech bill suggested by the government did not comply with a Supreme Court order.

The Supreme Court ruled that 31 provisions of the so-called online safety law that sought to control social media and online speech, was against the constitution.

The law passed with 108 votes of the 225-member assembly voting in favour with the main opposition vowing to overhaul the law if they came to power.

RELATED Sri Lanka parliament passes online speech law despite opposition

Opposition legislator M A Sumanthiran, a lawyer, said 13 amendments circulated among legislators overnight to be included in the so-called ‘committee stage’ or final reading at parliament, did not comply with the Supreme Court order.

For example, the Supreme Court had ordered that mobile text and MMS messages be exempted from the law, but it was not done, he said.

“This is a very serious matter,” Sumanthiran said. “If this is passed it will not be law.”

He said a new clause was being introduced which was also not in the order.

Premjayntha said the changes were vetted by the Attorney General and the legal draftsman. However the original bills that the Supreme Court usually rules as being unconstitutional also go through the same process.

“Honorable Sumanthiran has made a very serious submission,” Opposition Leader Sajith Premadasa said.

“He has factual details to prove that there is a gross contradiction between the government’s amendment and S C determination. It is incumbent upon us to make those amendments according to the Supreme Court decision.

“The government is not agreeable, so what to do? ” speaker Mahinda Abeywardana said amid shouts of protest from the opposition.

Opposition legislator Rauf Hakeem said the matter should be referred to a standing committee, according to existing procedures.

Hakeem had pointed out previously that governments were slipping in amendments without judicial review at the so-called committee stage.

RELATED Sri Lanka’s legislative skullduggery without judicial review at ‘committee stage’ exposed

Sri Lanka does not have post-enactment judicial review yet. (Colombo/Jan25/2023)