Sri Lanka – France Business Council charts new course at 22nd Annual General Meeting

Chief Guest Ambassador Rémi Lambert says French investors continue to face challenges relating to market access and cumbersome administrative procedures

Emphasises addressing these barriers would be critical to unlocking greater French investments

Outgoing President André Fernando highlights several significant initiatives undertaken during his tenure

New President Shaameel Mohideen outlines ambitious five-point agenda to guide the Council’s work during the coming year

The Sri Lanka – France Business Council of The Ceylon Chamber of Commerce concluded its 22nd Annual General Meeting recently at the Galle Face Hotel, Colombo.

The Annual General Meeting, followed by a cocktail reception, brought together members, government representatives, members of the diplomatic corps, business leaders and council members. Ambassador of France to Sri Lanka and the Maldives Rémi Lambert, graced the occasion as the Chief Guest, while officials from the Embassy of Sri Lanka in France joined the proceedings virtually.

The meeting marked the appointment of a new leadership team to steer the Council’s activities for the year ahead. Shaameel Mohideen of Spillburg Holdings was elected President, with Zafir Hashim of John Keells Holdings PLC elected Senior Vice President, Husni Salieh of Noyon Lanka Ltd., elected Vice President and Manura Wickramasinghe of Puritas Ltd., elected Treasurer.

Representatives from A. Baur and Co. Ltd., Aitken Spence Travels, CEVA Logistics Lanka Ltd., Diesel and Motor Engineering PLC and Universal Travel Bureau Ltd., were elected to serve on the Committee.

In recognition of their longstanding contributions to the Council, Past Presidents Senake Amerasinghe, Dilipan Tyagarajah and Dr. Asanka Ratnayake were appointed as Honorary Members. A Subcommittee comprising representatives from International Distillers Ltd, Jayantha Premachandra Foundation, Maliban Healthcare Ltd., Marlbo Trading Company, Propylon One Ltd., and Web Lankan.com Ltd., was also appointed to support the Council’s activities.

In his address, Ambassador Lambert reaffirmed the strong and longstanding relationship between France and Sri Lanka while highlighting the considerable opportunities for expanding bilateral trade and investment. He noted that French investors continue to face challenges relating to market access and cumbersome administrative procedures, emphasising that addressing these barriers would be critical to unlocking greater French investment. He observed that the Council’s priorities for the year ahead closely align with these objectives and would play an important role in strengthening the bilateral economic partnership.

Reflecting on the Council’s achievements over the past year, outgoing President André Fernando of MAC Holdings highlighted several significant initiatives undertaken during his tenure. These included strengthening engagement with key French trade and investment promotion organisations such as the Indo-French Chamber of Commerce and Industry and Business France, while creating new opportunities for collaboration between the business communities of the two countries. He also reflected on the Council’s flagship Annual Wine Evening, which reached new heights in 2025 with the participation of renowned French rugby legend Serge Betsen, further elevating one of the Council’s signature networking events.

Addressing the membership following his election, President Shaameel Mohideen outlined an ambitious five-point agenda that will guide the Council’s work during the coming year. The strategy focuses on strengthening bilateral trade and improving market access, promoting greater French investment into Sri Lanka, supporting sustainability and innovation across industries, expanding tourism and cultural engagement between the two countries, and delivering greater value to members through meaningful networking opportunities, business engagements and advocacy initiatives.

As the Council embarks on a new chapter under its newly elected leadership, it remains committed to further strengthening commercial and economic ties between Sri Lanka and France by facilitating business partnerships, encouraging investment, promoting knowledge exchange and providing a vibrant platform for engagement between the public and private sectors of both countries.