Consciousness (Mind) – Buddhist explanation

The Buddha advised his followers not to waste time speculating about four frequently discussed topics. Mind is one. He said it is like a man who has been wounded with an arrow seeking to find who shot it and for what reason etc. What is needed is to check the extent of damage and seek treatment to prevent death or further damage. According to Buddha, there were 62 prevailing views of the mind in the sixth century B.C. The number has increased to 350 views now as described in the web site of Robert Lawrence Kuhn named The Landscape of consciousness; but no one is any wiser.

The Buddha explained, the body and mind are interdependently arisen and both are impermanent. Before his explanation the view of a permanent mind occupying an impermanent body (sasvatha ditthi) mostly prevailed in the world. The other view that prevailed is that body and mind arise together and perish at death (nasthika ditthi). Buddha disagreed with both as explained below in this article.

Thus, he is the only religious leader to state the mind or what we feel as our ‘self’ is not an unchanging permanent entity such as a soul, spirit, athman or a chief executive officer that could control every aspect of life.

Mind, the Buddha explained, is a stream of momentary mental units (citthakkhana) that arise and cease. Consciousness or thoughts arise as a set of these units when an object is presented to the five sensory organs or the mind directly. Objects could be physical, mental or psycho-physical. It is the function of this activated series of mental units arising as thoughts (which he named vinnana) to identify objects and initiate activity as a response or reaction. He said no consciousness arises without an object. William James, the Eighteenth Century American philosopher who agreed is given the honour for a similar description of the mind in modern philosophy. Buddha is the first person to describe details of the five sensory organs that brought external data to the mind to cause thoughts to arise. He also classified the mind as the sixth sensory organ that functioned for thoughts to arise from memory, imagination and internal body senses. He said internal body senses also influence other thoughts. Modern science accepts this aspect of the mind. Aristotle (born centuries after Buddha) is given the honour as the first person to have described sensory organs, and he described only five.

Units of consciousness arise and cease between thoughts when awake, during sleep and in unconscious states to maintain the stream of consciousness uninterrupted from birth to death. We are not aware of these units of consciousness arising and ceasing. They are named bhavanga citta  (translated as life continuum) or alaya vinnana (storehouse memory, according to another sect of Buddhism). Modern term for this aspect of the mind is sub-conscious state.

Modern science has proved mental activity is related to changes in electrical activity and increased blood supply in various regions of the brain (E.E.G records and functioning MRI scans of the brain). These recordings prove mental activity continues in the brain even when one is not conscious.

According to Buddhist psychology, each unit of consciousness arises with several co-arising mental factors to form thoughts. It is similar to various atoms forming with subatomic particles in matter. Mental factors are said to be latent in the mind and arise with consciousness when the occasion arises. At least seven mental factors named universal mental factors need to be present for a unit of consciousness to arise. There are 52 mental factors identified and listed. A set of mental units forming a thought (named vinnana) arises according to a universal order, each particular unit performing different functions. Mental factors are now described in modern neuro-psychology as psychological modules or neuronal circuits involved in various aspects of thoughts such as emotions, moods, cognition, volitions etc.

An act of perception or cognition (identifying objects presented to the sensory organs or the mind directly) or conation (will to start activities as a response or reaction) based on any object need at least four sets of consciousness units rapidly following the first set started in the mind. This is similar to reverberations that arise when a gong is struck. Perception, volition and action are initiated and completed during this wave of consciousness processes. The order is named citta niyama or law of mental activity.

Each set has a maximum of 17 consciousness units for sensory objects and a minimum of 10 consciousness units for objects directly arising in the mind. When an object is presented to a sensory organ or the mind directly, the arising of consciousness is triggered by a mental factor named phassa (translated as contact) which has the function of initiation of mental activity. It is helped by another co-arising mental factor named manasikara (translated as attention) which directs the mind to the object

This description parallels modern neurophysiology explanations. According to neuroscience networks of neurones in many regions of the brain known as the dorsal frontoparietal network (for objects arising in the mind) and ventral attention networks (for external sensory stimuli) are activated in cognition. This is followed by activation of many areas of the brain to complete the cognition and response or reaction. This is similar to reverberating thought processes described above in Abhidhamma.

Buddha said mental activity is the fastest event in the universe. If you turn your head Left and Right swiftly and count many objects you have noticed, you may realise how fast the mind deals with visual objects. Each item you saw needed at least five sets of consciousness processes for cognition.

Consciousness can be focussed only on one object at a time and also one aspect of an object with one consciousness. The mind changes so fast one thinks one is able to cognise more than several aspects of an object or many objects at once. Examples: smell, colour, texture and taste of a food item when eating. Each sense needs a separate series of consciousness units. Physiology experiments have shown, even a big visual object needs the eyes to move and note several aspects and the mind constructs a full mental image swiftly, using the data provided by multiple sets of visual consciousness. Therefore, one feels the whole object is seen at once. This has been proved by recording eye movements of a subject when a large object is seen.

The above picture shows two different female faces. (See picture 1). Only one can be visualised at a time. To visualise the other, one has to change the consciousness to change the focus. This proves one consciousness can only focus on one aspect of the picture. One can also gauge how fast the consciousness changed to another during alternate visualising of the two faces.

However, unlike in modern science and material view of life, Buddha accepted the stream of consciousness does not stop at death. According to Buddha, the stream of consciousness or the mind arises in another body after death. He named the process rebirth. This is different to reincarnation of a permanent soul. He said he verified rebirth with his developed mind following meditation. He explained anyone who has attained the highest level of meditation consciousness to what is described as the fourth jhana consciousness could verify rebirth. Without this ability, one depends on rebirth stories of children, past life regression in hypnosis and extraordinary abilities such as child prodigies speaking in many languages without training to think rebirth is a fact.

Buddhist psychology explains the process of rebirth in detail. The main reason for rebirth is a strong desire to continue to live and enjoy life experiences (bhava tanha and kama tanha). Circumstances of rebirth are influenced by many factors. An important one (not the only one) is the results of past intended action (vipaka of active kamma) both good and bad.

Buddhist psychology has identified mental factors that are wholesome or positive (kusala) and unwholesome or negative (akusala). There are 14 akusala and 25 kusala mental factors. Broadly speaking they are related to three major unwholesome mental factors: attraction, ill-will and delusion and their wholesome opposites: generosity, good-will and wisdom.

Buddha advised his followers to verify the working of the mind he described by introspection (sandhittiko). Introspection uses a mental factor named sati translated inadequately as mindfulness. (This has been recently named metacognition pretending it to be a new discovery. This is available to human beings and a very few animal minds.) The method is to use the developed mind with meditation named concentration meditation (samatha) or in modern terms mindfulness meditation. Following concentration of the mind and introspection, one understands the mind is not a permanent entity (anicca and anatta), but a changing process and therefore not satisfactory (dukkha).

Beginning of the Buddhist path is to develop a happy present life avoiding conflicts and cultivating generosity, love and wisdom. This stage may be followed even by anyone who does not believe in the afterlife. Those who accept after life (of any religion) may expect this practice to lead to rebirth or reincarnation (depending on belief) under happy and better conditions. For those who believe and understand the futility of the unsatisfactory relentless round of births and deaths (named samsara) that preceded and awaits all living beings, he prescribed the practice of insight meditation (vipassana), a gradual path of release. Gradual attenuation and eradication of unwholesome mental factors and further development of consciousness to a supra mundane level (Nibbana) is the path. Modern discovery of plasticity of the brain (ability to change and regroup the circuits of neurons) shows it is possible.

162nd Remembrance Day of Police Heroes “Police Heroes, you shall be eternally remembered!”

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.