The JRJ syndrome

Politicians cannot bring themselves to let go of power after savouring it and do everything possible to retain their hold thereon. This may explain why excessive powers vested in the executive presidency, draconian laws such as the Prevention of Terrorism Act (PTA), and the misuse of Emergency regulations have survived successive governments led by self-righteous leaders who promised to protect democracy during election campaigns. Only President J. R. Jayewardene (JRJ) made no bones about his dictatorial intentions.

The incumbent dispensation has failed to be different from the previous governments which misused emergency regulations to further their political interests. On Friday (06), Parliament voted to extend a state of emergency, declared by President Anura Kumara Dissanayake in the aftermath of Cyclone Ditwah about two months ago. The Opposition let out a howl of protest, claiming that the JVP-NPP government kept on extending a state of emergency with an ulterior motive—suppressing democratic dissent.

On Friday, the government frontbenchers took great pains to have the public believe that the Opposition was seeing ‘more devils than vast hell can hold’ when it claimed the extension of the state of emergency was aimed at suppressing democracy. However, the Opposition’s arguments were tenable. Arguing that there was no need for emergency regulations for the ongoing relief and rebuilding programmes to be carried out, Opposition Leader Sajith Premadasa said that instead of extending the state of emergency, the government should amend the Disaster Management Act and create a new Ministry for Disaster Management. This is a cogent argument. The government’s disaster preparedness left much to be desired in November 2025. Sri Lanka is among the countries badly affected by the extreme weather events related to climate change, and the government must urgently set up a separate ministry for disaster management and give the existing disaster management laws stronger teeth.

Ironically, most of those who are berating the current administration for misusing emergency regulations had no qualms about doing so while in power. Only a snake will know the tracks of another snake, as a local saying goes. So, one should take serious note of what ‘snakes’ say about each other when they clash on the Diyawanna lakeshore.

There is no way the government can justify its decision to overuse emergency regulations by claiming that the call for declaring a state of emergency came from the Opposition in the immediate aftermath of Cyclone Ditwah.

President Dissanayake has declared that there will be no pay hikes until 2027, regardless of what trade unions may do to pressure his government. The emergency regulations which can be used to suppress workers’ right to strike should be viewed against President Dissanayake’s aforesaid statement which, in our book, is a warning. The government has resorted to brinkmanship in dealing with protesting doctors who have threatened to intensify their ongoing trade union action. Pro-government groups are astroturfing as ordinary citizens and calling for tough action to force the state sector trade unions into submission. Deputy Minister of Public Security Sunil Watagala has asked the police to use emergency regulations to deal with those who carry out what he describes as personal attacks on the President and the ministers. The Human Rights Commission of Sri Lanka has reportedly expressed serious concern over growing threats to freedom of expression in the country, particularly the targeting of journalists through police investigations into instances of alleged defamation.

Meanwhile, arrests are still made under the PTA, which the JVP-led NPP, in the run-up to the 2024 elections, pledged to abolish. It promised “the abolition of all oppressive acts including the Prevention of Terrorism Act and ensuring civil rights of people in all parts of the country”(NPP Policy Framework, A Thriving Nation: A beautiful Life, p. 129). Time was when Dissanayake, as an Opposition MP, waxed eloquent in Parliament, condemning governments for overusing emergency regulations.

All Executive Presidents, except D. B. Wijetunga, have been affected by what may be described as the JRJ syndrome, which drives the wielders of the presidency to arrogate to themselves the powers of vital state institutions and subjugate everything to the interests of their political parties. No surprise that President Dissanayake now has emergency regulations extended on some pretext or another. Besides, he travels by helicopter, and two choppers are deployed in tandem for his journeys even though he once condemned his predecessors for that practice, sarcastically asking whether a President could jump from one helicopter to another in midair in case of an emergency. This kind of behaviour exemplifies the popular local saying: “A water monitor  (kabaragoya) becomes a land monitor (thalagoya) when one wants to eat it.”

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.