Sad Day for Sri Lanka Navy Special Boat Squadron

A Few months ago, he was in the headlines as the first Sri Lankan to win the US Navy SEAL Commando Trident badge. Lt. Koyan Chamitha of the elite Special Boat Squadron (SBS) achieved this unique honour by successfully completing the SEAL BUDs course at the US Navy SEAL training school in the US. This is considered one of the toughest commando training courses in the World. Koyan joined 200 US Navy personnel and candidates of other friendly navies for 14 months of unbelievable training, the worst part being the “Hell week”: trainees are NOT ALLOWED TO SLEEP FOR ONE WEEK and are made to do rigorous training in mud flats of San Diego beachfront of California, bordering Mexico.

SEAL means training for unconventional warfare at sea––all SEALs are combat divers), air––all SEALs are paratroopers––and land warfare, including maritime, jungle, urban and Arctic terrains.

Out of 200 trainees, only 27 finally qualified to proudly wear the SEAL pin-Trident pin on their uniform! Koyan was one of them; he brought honour to SBS, the Sri Lanka Navy and the country.

The writer with Koyan on 01 November 2025 at the SBS HQ, Nicholson Cove, Naval Base, Trincomalee. He cofounded SBS with late Commander (VNF) Cedric Martinstyn in 1993 and commanded the elite naval unit twice during war.

When he returned to Sri Lanka last year, SBS leadership entrusted to him the task of training officers/sailors who volunteered for a new batch of SBS trainees. Last week, he interacted with US Navy SEALs at Trincomalee in the SBS/ US Navy SEALs joint exercise named “Exercise Balance Style”.

Soon after the joint exercise, he travelled to Colombo to participate in the Independence Day Parade scheduled on 4 February 2026 at Independence Square.

He stayed with other SBS officers and sailors taking part in parade rehearsals at the Naval Base at Welisara.

That fateful evening, he did rigorous gym training followed by a long swim in the swimming pool before having a light dinner and going to bed.

He was found dead in his cabin in the Welisara Wardroom (Officers’ Mess) the following morning—possibly a silent heart attack in sleep. The complete postmortem reports will come out soon.

The joint training with the US Navy SEALs started in 1996, exactly 30 years ago. The SBS conducted this joint training every year, except two years when it had to commit all its troops to fighting LTTE terrorists.

When we started joint training with US Navy SEALs, 30 years ago, our dream was to train one of the SBS officers at the San Diego US Navy Special Forces School. It took three decades for us to achieve that dream.

Our own Navy Special Boats Squadron SEAL, 24-year-old Koyan went away “like a candle in the wind”.

WV, RWP and Bar, RSP, VSV, USP, NI (M) (Pakistan), ndc, psn, Bsc

Sri Lanka Through Loving Eyes:A Call to Fix What Truly Matters

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.