Sri Lanka opens first country pavilion at London exhibition

Sri Lanka’s apparel industry marked a milestone with its first country pavilion at Source Fashion 2026. The exhibition was held from 13 to 15 January 2026 at Olympia London, one of Europe’s leading apparel sourcing events.

The pavilion was officially inaugurated on 13 January with a ribbon-cutting ceremony. High Commissioner of Sri Lanka in the UK Nimal Senadheera and UK’s Trade Envoy to Sri Lanka, Lord Hannett of Everton OBE presided over the event. Apparel and fashion industry representatives, exhibitors, invitees, and officials from the EDB Sri Lanka and the Sri Lanka High Commission in London attended the ceremony.

Sri Lanka’s participation was jointly organized by the EDB, Sri Lanka apparel industry, and the Sri Lanka High Commission in the UK. The objective was to strengthen trade ties, expand buyer networks, and position Sri Lanka as a preferred sourcing destination for the UK and European markets.

Twenty Sri Lankan apparel booths, including 12 SMEs, showcased locally manufactured apparel, textiles, handmade products, and value-added solutions for both industrial and consumer use. The pavilion highlighted manufacturers and designers offering high-quality, ethically produced collections. Sustainability, transparency, innovation, and long-term partnerships were central themes.

Exhibitors included Star Garments Group, Insomnia, J K Garments (Pvt.) Ltd, New Universe Clothing SL, Protector Clothing Manufacturers, Janasri Mills, Pridemo Apparel, Senvin Collection, True Digital Printing, Concord Manufacturing, Kobithan Garments, Hayleys Free Zone Ltd, JAS Activewear, Krisherert Holdings, Jia Moda, Randhi International, “Creative Sri Lanka” booth, and the EDB booth.

Sri Lankan apparel also featured prominently in a series of Source Fashion Catwalk Shows highlighting the country’s design and manufacturing capabilities alongside world-class international apparel showcased at the event.

Sri Lanka’s presence at the Source Fashion London-2026 was further strengthened by new trade opportunities which are available for Sri Lanka with zero import duty created under the UKs Developing Countries Trading Scheme (DCTS) mainly due to its flexible or liberalized Rules of Origin which are effective from 1 January 2026, as already announced by the UK. The announced flexibility will create greater opportunities for the competitive enhancement from Sri Lankan apparel exports into the UK market under its DCTS concessions.

Sri Lanka’s participation underscored its growing reputation as a trusted, sustainable, resilient, and innovative apparel sourcing destination. It reflected global market expectations, evolving supply chain requirements, and the Government of Sri Lanka’s vision for export and industry promotion in overseas markets. (Sri Lanka High Commission in London)

Ceylinco Life first to open eco-friendly branch on company land in Ambalantota

ComBank to boost WSME, Agri SME financing with IFC’s US$ 60Mn. Risk Sharing Facility

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.