CPA Australia delegation discusses collaboration with Sri Lanka institutions

ECONOMYNEXT – A delegation from CPA Australia, a global accounting body, met with government, professional bodies, universities, and banking institutions in Sri Lanka to discuss further collaborations.

“Sri Lanka is home to a wealth of experienced professionals and promising young talent pursuing careers in accounting and finance. This vibrant talent pool is a major driving force behind our strengthened commitment to the region,” Professor Dale Pinto (FCPA), Global President and Chair of the Board at CPA Australia was quoted in a statement.

The delegation, including board members and representatives from international markets, met with President Ranil Wickremesinghe and had discussions with local government officials, regulatory bodies, employers, and educational and banking institutions.

“Signing MoUs with esteemed organisations such as the CFA Society Sri Lanka and the University of Sri Jayewardenepura (USJ) enables us to collaborate effectively and empower young talent with the latest accounting and finance knowledge and skills. This collaboration will significantly contribute to Sri Lanka’s sustainable economic growth.”

Since the launch of its local liaison office in June 2023, CPA has seen membership flourish to nearly 500. “Many of these members are now holding pivotal roles across diverse industries, showcasing the strength and influence of CPA Australia in the region.”

A ceremony recognising long-standing members also celebrated Sri Lankan companies officially recognised as CPA Australia’s employer partners (REP).

“We are immensely grateful for the support of prominent employers partnering with CPA Australia to advance the accounting and finance profession in Sri Lanka,” Professor Pinto said. “Their collaboration opens up exceptional opportunities for our members, enabling them to thrive and succeed in their careers on a global scale.”

CPA Australia‘s “Digitalisation, AI and the future of business” forum on July 23, attracted more than 100 C-suite executives and senior professionals to discuss how emerging technologies will impact business in the future.

“With a focus on collaboration, knowledge sharing, and future-proof skills development, CPA Australia’s visit to Sri Lanka marks a significant step forward in the organisation’s commitment to supporting the country’s economic growth and empowering its talented professionals.” (Colombo/Jul31/2024)