Sri Lanka plans to draw higher spending tourists with Southern cultural events

ECONOMYNEXT – Sri Lanka is planning to attract higher spending tourists with cultural and culinary events strung along the main resort towns of the Indian Ocean island’s south coast, officials said.

“We want to attract 2.5 high-end tourists spending 500 dollars as opposed to spending 200 dollars,” Chalaka Gajabahu, Chairman of Sri Lanka Tourism Promotion Bureau said.

Labelled the ‘Galle Concerto’ it brings together several independent events.

Galle Literary Festival with the participation of international and local authors will run from January 25-28.

It will have 72 stalls and several publishers, Edward Robinson representing the Southern Book Fair said.

Tracy Holsinger, festival organizer for the Galle Literary festival as well as Gourmet Galle, another such event, said at the latter “international chefs would be cooking for their guests with locally-sourced ingredients.”

“Chefs such as Peter Kuruvita are coming, and it’s going to be a ‘gastronomic delight'”.

“Sri Lanka would also host the Matara Festival for the Arts, inaugural edition, with contemporary art shown in the Ruhuna University,” Chanchala Gunewardena, co-founder of this festival said.

Gunawardena said that the festival would feature guided tours of Geoffrey Bawa’s work.

Another event, an opera festival, would be conducted at Anantara Hotel in Tangalle where there will also be masterclasses.

Roberto Simone, the festival organizer, said that artists from New Zealand and the US would be attending.

Sri Lanka drew 1.48 million visitors in 2023 and is targeting 2.3 million tourists in 2024.

In the first 15 days of January, 101,362 tourists had visited Sri Lanka compared to 102,545 for the entire month last year.

The events are also supported by President Ranil Wickremesinghe, Niranjan Deva Adithya, advisor and a former member of the European Union of Sri Lankan origin.

“This event would show that we are back on the world map,” Adithya said. (Colombo/Jan18/2024)