‘Agricultural mechanization essential for ensuring food security’

Agricultural mechanization is very important for any country to progress and to ensure future food security besides maximizing benefits for local farmlands and improving the living standard of the people, Senior Vice President, Shaktiman International Business, Shawshank Watane said.

“In India agri- mechanization is around 45 percent but in the USA it’s about 95 percent. Therefore in Sri Lanka it is not high and farm mechanization will assist farmers to enhance their quality of life, provide food and farmland security and help reduce high labour costs,” Watane told a media conference recently at Grandezza Hotel, Negombo. On the same day Shaktiman’s annual dealer convention was also held.

‘Our main focus is to provide technology to farmers at an affordable cost and over the last ten years the company has sold more than 25000 farmland tractors. Further, to fill this void for machinery Shaktiman of India is ready to improve mechanization in Sri Lanka’s agriculture by supplying their range of machinery to Sri Lanka, Watane added.

‘The Sri Lankan agricultural sector still relies on traditional machinery-based farming. New machinery can increase productivity and efficiency, Head of Customer Care, Shaktiuman, Rajendra Paraska said.

‘The Sri Lankan agri-sector badly needs more inputs of machinery to move to the next level, Shaktiman’s Country Manager for Sri Lanka, Gajaba De Silva.

De Silva added: ‘To overcome global food production challenges and to achieve national economic goals, mechanization of Sri Lankan agriculture should be increased.

‘When the Shaktiman rotary machine is used, the soil is dug deep and the weeds in the field are suppressed due to the decay of the weeds.

‘There are many advantages that can be achieved by increasing agricultural mechanization as the process will also increase the organic value of the soil and provide a solution to the labor shortage as well. It will also create an opportunity for farmers to increase yield.

‘Shaktiman manufactures and distributes 107 types of agricultural machinery to over 100 countries. About 25 of the latest products are in the final stages of research.

‘Over 100 research teams are dedicated to sustainable agricultural mechanization. Our diverse product portfolio is expanding to cater to all aspects of the crop.’

Siyapatha Finance donates sign boards to police for ‘Devinuwara Esala Perahera’

Digital Innovation Fund powered by Dialog Axiata makes strategic investment in cybersecurity firm Scybers

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.