“Helmet – If you love” ~ UN/ FIA Road Safety Programme

Automobile Association of Ceylon conducts Road Safety programmes annually with the funding of FIA under UN Decade of Action 2021/2023 in Sri Lanka. This year’s campaign is ‘Helmet – If you love’; to educate public on the importance of children wearing helmets when travelling as pillion rider on motorcycles.

The aim of the programme is to educate children, parents, teachers, motorcyclists, etc. on the importance of children wearing helmets, not to simply abide by law, but to keep the safety factor in mind.

In line with World Children’s Day celebrations, Automobile Association of Ceylon (AA) together with Optimum Q Event Management Pvt Ltd. Is conducting awareness programmes at schools (drop off points), where parents drop their kids to school in Motorcycles.

It is being carried out together with teachers, police officers and school children, who deliver the message to parents and educate them on the importance of their children wearing helmets.

Parents who arrived with their children wearing helmets were rewarded with supermarket vouchers and encouraged their efforts towards safeguarding their kids.

Whereas parents who arrived without helmets for their children were educated by other children, who handed them balloons and explained to them that their child’s heads is as fragile as the balloon, in the face of a road accident. All parents understood the gravity of the situation, especially when pointed out the facts by other children in school.

Furthermore, some children were randomly picked and awarded with helmets at the school assembly/ interactive education session conducted by Devapriya Hettiarachchi, Secretary,AA Ceylon and S I Kariyawasam, Sri Lanka Police Headquarters. Teachers, children and parents were made aware of the acceptable safety characteristics of a helmet with the SLS standard and how to wear them properly.

All children, teachers and Principals seemed enthusiastic about the programme, as it is part of a subject that is taught to children at school. The children who took part in educating the parents at the drop off point were also awarded with gift vouchers for their efforts to spread the message to their fellow students’ parents.

The event was concluded with a Thank you speech by one of the school’s prefects.(AAC)

Cinnamon Hotels & Resorts elevates biodiversity awareness through ‘The Gathering of Giants’

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.