Serendib Flour Mills celebrates 15-year journey of purposefully nourishing the nation

Senior Management of  Serendib Flour Mills and Al-Ghurair (Parent company of Serendib)

Serendib Flour Mills (SFML) is celebrating 15 years of unwavering efforts to uplift the standard of living of all Sri Lankans with the finest wheat flour products, combining technological excellence and superior after sales service.

True to its purpose of nourishing the nation, SFML set up in 2008, said it has positively transformed Sri Lanka’s wider food ecosystem elevating standards in the country’s bakery and food industry and improved the quality of life across the country.

Serendib Flour Mills CEO Vijay Sharma said: “Since our founding, SFML’s purpose has been to nourish Sri Lankan families with essential, quality wheat flour while raising industry standards. We have persevered despite challenges in fulfilling our purpose – through production consistency, food security measures and nutritious offerings. As we commemorate 15 years, we celebrate the milestone and thank our partners and customers for their trust. We remain committed to enriching our nation’s sustenance further and to continue nourishing Sri Lankan families.”

As part of fulfilling its purpose, SFML has implemented robust food security measures to always guarantee an uninterrupted supply of wheat flour. Furthermore, the company manages five (05) regional warehouses at strategic locations in Sri Lanka stocking substantial quantity of wheat flour at any given time for easy market access for distributors, preventing any foreseeable delays in reaching customers, and affirming food security.

Prior to Serendib Flour Mills entering the market there were only one or two varieties of wheat flour available. However, with the advent of Serendib they segmented and developed specific products to suit each market niche. ‘Bakers Flour’ was developed with hard wheat to provide better oven spring for the bakery industry. Similarly, ‘rotti flour’ was formulated with low to medium gluten content but with high elasticity properties.

Continuing its commitment to elevate the bakery industry, SFML recently introduced a range of value-added products such as ‘Premium Bakery Flour’. With the new premium flour, bakeries can deliver a superior loaf of bread to its customers thus delivering quality and value.

As of today, Serendib boasts of over 20 different flour varieties specially crafted for various segments. Each variety is prepared according to specific product specifications tailored to meet application requirement. Parameters such as protein content, gluten levels, and water absorption etc. vary from one product to another to suit diverse applications. Theses varieties include recently launched premium bakers flour, bakers, rotti, all purpose, household flour, noodle flour, biscuit flour, chakki atta, wholemeal flour, fibre plus, semolina, cake flour etc.

Driving widespread impact, SFML has collaborated to enrich the entire bakery industry value chain by working closely with partners such as AB Mauri. AB Mauri is a well-respected bakery ingredients company, and it is advantageous to build partnerships with such firms for ongoing skill development initiatives. The synergy aims to enhance bakery product quality and revenue. As a result, customers today receive a premium product.

With the understanding that the estate community in Sri Lanka needs better nutrition, Serendib Flour Mills and the Planation Human Development Trust developed a fortified flour known as ‘Serendib Adi Shakthi’. Enriched with iron, folic acid and vitamin B12, the new product is aligned to SFML’s purpose of ‘Nourishing the Nation’. Addressing the long-standing dietary issue among the plantation communities Serendib Adi Shakthi aims to make a meaningful difference in their lives.

Recognising the high prevalence of non-communicable diseases (NCDs) in Sri Lanka, Serendib recently launched a new wheat flour named ‘7 Star Fibre Plus’ to help address the issue. It is reported that NCD’s account for over 80% of all deaths in Sri Lanka. 7 Star Fibre Plus contains 3% dietary fibre, iron and folic acid and provides 10% of the body’s daily fibre needs. This in turn assists in maintaining bowel health, lowering cholesterol and blood sugar levels, and achieving a healthy weight. Overall, Fibre Plus helps individuals live longer by combatting NCD risk factors.

Apart from commercial endeavours, Serendib also prioritises the wellbeing of its people. Serendib undertook the initiative to facilitate elderly people to witness the Annual Kandy Dalada perahera. Titled Serendib Uththama Dalada 2023, Serendib organised over 100 elderly people from over 4 elders homes located in Central and North-Western provinces to witness the majestic event. SFML ensured all facilities such as transport, food, seating arrangements etc. were provided for these elders to witness the perahera in comfort.

Similarly, during the height of COVID-19, Serendib embarked on a journey to supply wheat flour for over 1,000 families in the Chilaw district at a time when curfew was in place and people were deprived of their daily incomes. The program was titled ‘7 Star Manusathkara’ aimed to nourish the vulnerable sections of society. On the same lines over 2,500 flood effected families in Kinniya and Kalmunai areas were provided with their wheat flour requirements during the recent floods in these regions earlier this year.

In another initiative to nourish the environment, Serendib delivered wheat flour in bulk tankers and stored in silos for key its customers. The initiative resulted in the reduction of land fill as no PP bags were used to pack flour and less energy and storage space used thus contributing to the environmental sustainability.