Sri Lanka’s NPP on 39 pct of all adults, ahead of SJB, SLPP in December: poll

ECONOMYNEXT — Sri Lanka’s leftist National People’s Power (NPP) has maintained a lead over other political parties in December, a survey has found.

According to a general election voting intention poll among Sri Lankan adults carried out by the Institute for Health Policy (IHP) for December 2023, the NPP was ahead of the main opposition Samagi Jana Balawegaya (SJB), the president’s United National Party (UNP) and the ruling Sri Lanka Podujana Peramuna (SLPP).

Support for the SJB was at 27 percent in December while support for the SLPP was at 10 percent that month. Support for President Ranil Wickremesinghe’s UNP was at 6 percent.  The Ilankai Thamil Arasu Kachchi (ITAK), the main constituent party of the opposition Tamil National Alliance (TNA) and the Sri Lanka Muslim Congress (SLMC) enjoyed 3 percent each.

The December estimates are provisional and are associated with a margin of error of 2.0–3.5 percent for the four leading parties.

“The revised IHP SLOTS model estimates reveal more clearly that the current NPP/JVP lead is based on a continuous rise in support since early 2022. The SJB has also increased its support, but a slower pace, lying in second place since mid-2022. The December 2023 estimates also confirm a decline in support for the UNP since July 2023, with SLPP support holding steady,” the IHP said in a statement on January 26.

The organisation said that the latest results are based on a major revision of its Sri Lanka Opinion Tracker Survey (SLOTS) Multilevel Regression and Post-Stratification (MRP) model, intended to smooth monthly changes and reduce monthly fluctuations due to sampling noise. Unlike previous months which highlighted voting intent in likely voters, these estimates are for all adults. IHP said it is working on improving its likely voter model and will resume release of voting intent in likely voters in a future update. It should be noted, however, that differences in voting intent shares between all adults and likely voters have typically been 1–2 percent for most estimates in the past two years.

“The December 2023 update is based on 14,941 interviews conducted with adults across Sri Lanka since October 2021, with 522 interviews carried out in December. IHP’s SLOTS MRP methodology first estimates the relationship between a wide variety of characteristics about respondents and their opinions – in this case, ‘If there was a General Election today, which party would you vote for– in a ‘multilevel statistical model’. It then uses a large data file that is calibrated to the national population to predict voting intent in each month since October 2021, according to what the multilevel model says about their probability of voting for various parties (‘post-stratification’) at each point in time. The multilevel model was estimated 100 times to reflect underlying uncertainties in the model and to obtain margins of error,” the IHP said.