Sanasa Life Insurance supports Colombo International Book Fair as official insurance partner

Partnership agreement signed by Sanasa Life Insurance CEO Nuwanpriya Gunawardane and Sri Lanka Book Publishers Association Chairman Samantha Samarasinhe

Sanasa Life Insurance is the official insurance partner of the highly anticipated Colombo International Book Fair. As an organisation whose ethics extend beyond business, Sanasa Life Insurance views its sponsorship as life insurance partner of the book fair as a key part of its corporate responsibility that aligns with organisational values to support educational endeavors, thereby helping future generations in their path of educating themselves.

Commenting on the significance of the partnership, Sanasa Life Insurance CEO Nuwanpriya Gunawardena stated, “The annual book fair has become a vital part of Sri Lankan culture. As a customer centric organisation, Sanasa Life Insurance recognises the importance of education and it is a critical component of nation-building. In essence, it is the pathway to securing a better future for everyone. As an organisation that firmly supports matters of national interest, Sanasa is proud to contribute to the well-being of future generations and support event such as this”. As the official life insurance sponsor, Sanasa aims to raise awareness about the value of life and the importance of securing one’s future. The goal by way of sponsorship is to demonstrate how life insurance provides not only a crucial financial safety net in the event of unforeseen circumstances but also create a sense of peace of mind. In his closing remarks, Gunawardena stated, “The popularity of this book exhibition makes it a crucial hub that brings together readers, authors, publishers, students, as well as people from all walks of life. We see this as an ideal opportunity to raise awareness about the value of life insurance and its benefits across all segments of society. Sanasa Life Insurance is not only proud to be a part of this annual event but also looks forward to future participation. On behalf of our entire organisation, I wish the International Book Fair 2025 immense success.”