Tackling teenage mental health

“I’m grateful that my parents are always there for me to discuss any matter openly. I think what it most important for a teenager is to have a comfort of a loving home. I have made wrong decisions at times, misjudged people, got into wrong company, but my parents have never thrown a tantrum or shunned me. Instead, they have gently and wisely guided me back to the correct track,” said Natasha Jayamanne (name changed) who turned 18 recently.

She is also grateful to her supportive teachers who stood by her during some of the most turbulent periods in her life. “I was emotionally bullied which was affecting not only my studies but my overall health. I was anxious, scared and helpless and thanks to my parents and my teachers I found my bearings again,” noted Natasha.

On a different note, 17-year-old Nipuni Gunasekera (name changed) who just got her O/L results had this to say: “I was so excited to check my results online and I wanted both my parents to join me in doing so. Although I did not get 9-As, I got quite good results. When I expected my father to give me a hug and cheer me up, all he did was to sulk and turn his back on me and shut me out,” said Nipuni who spent two miserable days crying. “Although my mother was quite satisfied and comforted me, my father spoilt the moment for me and it was emotionally draining. I felt useless,” said Nipuni.

Navigating a phase of life between childhood and adulthood, being a teenager (13 to 19 years) has its own dilemmas and challenges. The anecdotes of Natasha’s and Nipuni testify that while strong and loving relationships can have a direct and positive influence on teenage mental health and self-esteem, the lack of such connectivity hinders personality development and resilience.

The rapid physical, cognitive and psycho-social growth they experience have a direct bearing on their emotions, decision-making and social-interactions. The challenges teenage years entails were compounded by the COVID-19 threat. The overall health and well being of teenagers was compromised by increasing anxiety and depression reported in many teenagers the world over. The ‘indefinite closure’ of schools forged a sense of hopelessness in many of them.

“What our teenagers here at home had to brave in the past few years was by no means easy. Starting with the Easter Sunday attacks and the pandemic which was followed by political and economic unrest in the country took a huge toll on them. The collective trauma and pain we underwent as a nation resulted in individual pain of varying degrees and children and teenagers were not spared. With school closures and their routine extra-curricular activities coming to a halt, more and more teenagers resorted to sedentary lifestyles at the cost of both physical and mental health.,” points out the Clinical Psychologist and Senior Lecturer, Faculty of Humanities and Social Sciences, Sri Lanka Institute of Information Technology (SLIIT), Nilusha Goonetilleke. The chain of disturbing turn of events which left many teenagers anxious, also resulted in loss of social and emotional connectivity.

Health Organization (WHO), it is estimated that one in seven (14%) adolescents (10–19 year olds) experience mental health conditions yet these remain largely unrecognized and untreated. ‘The consequences of failing to address adolescent mental health conditions extend to adulthood, impairing both physical and mental health and limiting opportunities to lead fulfilling lives as adults,’ notes WHO. Depression, anxiety and behavioural disorders are among the leading causes of illness and disability among adolescents. WHO also points out that adolescents with mental health conditions are particularly vulnerable to social exclusion, discrimination, stigma, educational difficulties, risk-taking behaviour, physical ill-health and human rights violations.

While the onset of adolescence is considered to be 10 years, the onset of teenage years is 13. “A child’s social and emotional habits which are critical for mental well-being are developed at the onset of adolescence. These habits would include interpersonal skills, cognitive skills, healthy eating habits and healthy sleeping patterns and regular exercising. The immediate family, extended family, school and the wider community at large play a decisive role in shaping these habits,” observes the psychologist who goes onto note that while supportive and protective communities could boost the mental health of adolescents and teenagers, poor parenting, domestic violence and bullying, socio-economic challenges which lead to discrimination or exclusion and lack of access to support services compromise the mental health of adolescents and teenagers. “During adolescence, certain patterns of behaviour related to substance abuse and sexual activity are also established and empowering teenagers about the risk these habits entail and equipping them with age-appropriate sexuality education could not only protect their long-term health but also the others around them,” says Goonetilleke

Multiple factors affect mental health, says WHO. Exposure to adversity, pressure to conform with peers and exploration of identity are among these factors. ‘Media influence and gender norms can exacerbate the disparity between an adolescent’s lived reality and their perceptions or aspirations for the future.’

A growing body of research has also been showing that excessive electronic device use is associated with many muscular and skeletal symptoms including neck/shoulder pain and lower back pain as well as mental health issues including social and parental relationship problems, sleep disruption, drop in academic performance, fatigue and numerous other mental health issues. Needless to say, the COVID pandemic was a double-whammy with more and more children resorting to devices.

“It is a fact that all over the world that the virtual education led to device-abuse among many adolescents. This also led to the widening disparity between those who could afford devices, internet facilities and those who couldn’t, especially in developing countries such as ours. Many of our children and teenagers were left behind with no access even to a smart phone for their on-line lessons. This led to increasing anxiety and distress among them,” remarks the psychologist.

Devices and social media are the two inseparable evils and almost all modern parents are forced to deal with. Teenager-parent conflicts are common due to social-media dependency. “The trial and error, behavioural practice process that all teenagers went through historically is now replaced with social media.

Sadly, many teenagers are made to believe that social media has answers to everything from decision-making to body image. They need to be empowered that these answers are not authentic,” points out Goonetilleke. Addiction to social media outlets could affect interpersonal relationships, communication skills and also disrupt sleep patterns and nutritional needs.

“Today we find many students as young as 12 years addicted to social media. They doze off during classes and show behavioural changes which could be isolation, lethargy or even bouts of anger. They lose interest in school work and also other school activities. It is very sad that many youngsters see only the outward glamour of these outlets,” remarked a teacher (on grounds of anonymity) from a leading Colombo school who urges school authorities to take more proactive initiatives to empower youngsters about the make-believe world of social media. “There have been incidents of young school girls falling a prey to strangers whom they have befriended on social media. Parental supervision on devices is critical which enable youngsters to access social media,” she said further.

Fierce academic competition fostered in children both by the education system of the country as well as some parents who set unrealistic goals is another crucial contributor which affects the mental health of our youngsters in a negative way. “Our education starting from the Grade five scholarship up to the university admission is a never-ending rat race where skills, emotional intelligence and other innate abilities of a child (who eventually becomes a teenager) are undermined. There is hardly any time for a child to develop an aesthetic sense of appreciating a book, music or a film because they are often driven around from one tuition class to another.

“Even if a child does a sport, it is sometimes for wrong reasons; instead of helping a child cultivate leadership qualities, accepting victory and defeat in the same spirit, today a good number of parents as well as trainers instill unhealthy competition in them. Certain games and sports are selected by parents regardless of child’s aptitude for it, merely to maintain a particular social status. All this could take a huge mental toll in youngsters, leading to frustration, mental health conditions and unruly behaviour,” Kalyani Jayasundera, an educationist noted.

Incidents of teenagers being bullied in school for their body shape is not uncommon. Added to it, today we find parents bullying their own children to achieve the so called the ‘perfect body shape’. Extreme controlling of the diet, vigorous physical exercising and comparing the child to that of a friend’s or another relative’s and ‘body-shaming’ or humiliating one’s own child are not uncommon. “Many parents don’t realize the long-term harm they inflict on their children’s self-esteem and overall mental health by these extreme acts of making them stay in shape. We often see such children and teenagers driven to binging and later on developing eating disorders and personality disorders as adults,” points out the psychologist.

Positive-parenting plays the fundamental role in the overall well being of a child who would eventually become an adult and a parent himself/herself. The Positive Parenting Manual of UNICEF Sri Lanka notes that positive parenting ‘is a belief, a way of living’ and ‘is not restricted to a method, a set of rules, or a style’. It further says that ‘Positive parenting is about building a mutually respectful relationship with your children, teaching children life-long skills, increasing children’s competence and confidence to handle challenging situation and teaching courtesy, non-violence, empathy, self-respect, human rights and respect for others.’

The manual also notes that ‘the very first step to become a positive parent is to adjust one’s thinking, by improving your own knowledge, attitudes, behaviours and skills.’ With the generation gap becoming wider even in cultures such as ours, the need for positive parenting is unprecedented in helping children and teenagers navigate the trappings of modern times, remarks Goonetilleke. “Today extended families with grandparents are fast becoming a scene from the past. This has also resulted in the absence of traditional parental wisdom passed down. Even among extended family units, modern parents have to navigate a new set of challenges for which we too as a country should prepare with enhanced interventions for positive parenting which would ultimately empower children and teenagers,” concludes the psychologist.

Learn to say ‘no’ to wrong people, wrong places and wrong deeds

It is natural for teenagers to be attracted to the opposite sex

Pick out any behavioural changes such as withdrawal from family, friends, school work, disruption in sleep patterns, anger outburst, anxiety, fear

Celebrate your teenager’s achievements – these need not be always academic, but an act of kindness, empathy, bravery- all these matter­

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.