Fitch lowers Sri Lanka’s HDFC Bank outlook to negative, retains ‘BB+(lka)’ rating

ECONOMYNEXT – Fitch Ratings has affirmed its National Long-Term Rating at ‘BB+(lka)’ on Housing Development Finance Corporation Bank of Sri Lanka, and revised the outlook to negative from stable due to the potential for the state bank’s credit profile to deteriorate.

“We believe the regulatory restrictions have dampened HDFC’s competitive position in the housing loan segment, which is predominantly driven by Employees’ Provident Fund (EPF)-backed loans, and its loan and deposit market share.”

The outlook revision reflects the potential for HDFC’s credit profile to deteriorate relative to that of similarly rated peers due to the restrictions on deposit mobilisation and selected lending products imposed by the central bank, the ratings agency said.

Fitch Revises Outlook on HDFC Bank to Negative; Affirms National Rating at ‘BB+(lka)’

Fitch Ratings – Colombo – 15 Aug 2025: Fitch Ratings has revised the Outlook on Housing Development Finance Corporation Bank of Sri Lanka (HDFC) to Negative, from Stable, and affirmed its National Long-Term Rating at ‘BB+(lka)’.

Restrictions Weigh on Rating: The Outlook revision reflects the potential for HDFC’s credit profile to deteriorate relative to that of similarly rated peers due to the restrictions on deposit mobilisation and selected lending products imposed by the Central Bank of Sri Lanka (CBSL), according to the bank’s 2024 annual report. The degree to which the trend is sustained will depend on the duration of the restrictions and the bank’s ability to pursue business expansion in permitted areas. The bank is currently not in breach of any prudential regulatory requirements.

HDFC’s National Long-Term Rating reflects its weak standalone credit profile. The rating also reflects the bank’s limited domestic franchise, high risk profile and its weaker-than-average asset quality, which stems from its large exposure to low- and middle-income customers, who are more susceptible to economic and interest-rate cycles.

Risks to Business Profile: We believe the regulatory restrictions have dampened HDFC’s competitive position in the housing loan segment, which is predominantly driven by Employees’ Provident Fund (EPF)-backed loans, and its loan and deposit market share. The bank took the interim measure of increasing its focus on other retail products such as leases and pawning to mitigate the effects of these lending restrictions. HDFC’s ability to meaningfully expand its business model will depend on its capacity to raise deposits, which are the bank’s main source of funding.

Considerably Weaker Loan Quality: HDFC’s asset quality metrics are among the system’s weakest with an impaired-loan ratio of nearly 52% at end-1H25 (2024: 48.6%, 2023: 43.4%), of which around half stemmed from its EPF-backed housing loans. We expect this product to weigh on the bank’s loan quality metrics in the near to medium term, exacerbated by the contracting loan book. Fitch expects the CBSL to continue to settle the defaulted portion of EPF-backed housing loans.

Funding Restrictions: Curbs on the bank’s deposit mobilisation limit its funding avenues given the reliance on deposits as the primary source of funding and less diverse wholesale funding profile. HDFC has resorted to bank borrowings to fund loan growth, which is likely to drive up the loan-to-deposit ratio over the medium term from current lows (1H25: 82.7%, 2024: 83%).

Liquidity currently remains reasonable with bank placements and government securities together covering about 44% of total deposit liabilities. We believe prolonged deposit mobilisation restrictions could challenge the bank’s ability to raise term funding, exacerbating its asset-liability mismatches.

Factors that Could, Individually or Collectively, Lead to Negative Rating Action/Downgrade

HDFC’s National Rating is sensitive to a change in the bank’s creditworthiness relative to other Sri Lankan issuers.

A sustained loss of HDFC’s competitiveness in the housing loan segment, particularly in EPF-backed loans, leading to a weakened franchise could result in a downgrade of the bank’s National Rating. Negative rating action may also arise from a persistent deterioration in HDFC’s financial profile, particularly if capital levels fall below the regulatory minimum requirement of LKR7.5 billion and remain uncured for an extended period. In addition, widening asset liability mismatches due to the bank’s inability to access funding could also trigger a downgrade.

Factors that Could, Individually or Collectively, Lead to Positive Rating Action/Upgrade

There is limited scope for upward rating action given the Negative Outlook. Fitch may revise the Outlook to Stable if the risk of credit profile deterioration diminishes after regulatory restrictions are lifted.

HDFC’s outstanding senior unsecured debentures are rated at the same level as its National Long-Term Rating in accordance with Fitch’s criteria. This is because the debentures rank equally with the claims of the bank’s other senior unsecured creditors.

The senior debt rating will move in tandem with the bank’s National Long-Term Rating.

REFERENCES FOR SUBSTANTIALLY MATERIAL SOURCE CITED AS KEY DRIVER OF RATING

The principal sources of information used in the analysis are described in the Applicable Criteria.