CEAT Kelani presents traffic management tools to police and SLCMP

CEAT Kelani Holdings has broadened the scope of its flagship community initiative promoting road safety around schools by engaging with the Police and the Sri Lanka Corps of Military Police (SLCMP) of the Sri Lanka Army, two institutions that play lead roles in this domain.

The company recently presented stocks of traffic management-related signboards and traffic cones to these institutions, as one of its community commitments that makes up the ‘CEAT Cares’ portfolio of community projects.

The signboards and traffic cones presented to the Cinnamon Gardens Police Station are to be strategically placed on main roads to facilitate traffic management near schools, government institutions, and other high-traffic areas within the station’s jurisdiction, supporting CEAT’s efforts to help improve road safety and aid law enforcement maintain smooth traffic flows.

Meanwhile, the signboards presented to the Military Police of the Sri Lanka Army will facilitate the SLCMP’s role in traffic control and ensuring safety during major national celebrations such as the Independence Day celebrations and national war heroes commemoration ceremonies, as well as events organised by the Sri Lanka Army.

An articulation of CEAT’s credo – “Making mobility safer and smarter every day” – the CEAT Cares programme has been sustained by CEAT Kelani Holdings since 2010 and has benefitted 290 schools across the country to date. It involves the presentation of traffic safety equipment to schools located close to main roads and in high congestion zones as part of the company’s continuing commitment to make commuting safer, especially for school children. This flagship community initiative was designed to reflect CEAT’s focus on safety on the roads – a key element in all its products.

The largest domestic manufacturer of cross-ply and radial tyres in Sri Lanka, CEAT Kelani Holdings currently manufactures half of the country’s pneumatic tyre requirements, and exports about 20 per cent of its production to 16 countries. The joint venture’s cumulative investment in Sri Lanka over the past decade alone exceeds Rs 8.5 billion.

Ambeon Holdings increases stake in Seylan Bank and strengthens financial services footprint

Digital marketing in high gear to increase tourist arrivals to Sri Lanka

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.