No crime should go unpunished

Politicians uphold the rule of law only when they are out of power. Their respect for the law and their love for democracy last only until an opportunity comes their way to savour power. Thereafter, they lay bare their true faces and bulldoze their way through; they even consider the Constitution an obstacle in their path. This is the name of the game in Sri Lankan politics.

The Badulla High Court (HC) yesterday sentenced SJB MP Chaminda Wijesiri to one-and-a-half years’ imprisonment for assaulting and injuring two police officers in February 2019. The prosecution stated that MP Wijesiri, his driver and a police officer attached to the Ministerial Security Division had stopped a police vehicle and issued death threats to the victims before setting upon them in the middle of the Bandarawela town. The MP was angry that the police vehicle had overtaken his SUV.

MP Wijesiri may not have thought he would have to face the consequences of his action. All he can do now is to appeal against the HC judgement.

JVP-NPP propagandists are in overdrive, condemning MP Wijesiri and the entire Opposition, which they say is full of lawbreakers. However, Wijesiri committed the offence at issue when he was in the UNP, which was on honeymoon with the JVP. The UNP-led UNF, which formed the Yahapalana government in 2015 with the SLFP-led UPFA as a partner, was dependent on the JVP for survival in 2019. The JVP threw its weight behind the UNP when the then President Maithripala Sirisena fell out with Prime Minister Ranil Wickremesinghe, sacked the latter, appointed former President Mahinda Rajapaksa as Prime Minister and tried to dissolve Parliament as he could not muster a working majority, in late 2018.

The JVP was instrumental in fighting a successful legal battle against President Sirisena and helping Wickremesinghe and the UNP regain control of Parliament. It was the power of that dysfunctional government that went to the heads of the likes of Wijesiri. There is no record of the JVP publicly condemning the 2019 incident while it was propping up the UNP-led government.

Now that MP Wijesiri has been sentenced to prison for attacking and injuring two police officers, action must be taken against the perpetrators of heinous crimes against the members of the police and the security forces in the late 1980s, such as the killing of police and military personnel and their family members for refusing to carry out the JVP’s illegal orders, attacking police stations and military camps and robbing their weapons.

President Anura Kumara Dissanayake has rightly pointed out that some serious crimes are not subject to statutory limitations for prosecution. He has said he will not allow those crimes to be buried in the sands of time. He ought to ensure that all lawbreakers who got away with their offences during the previous governments, especially those who perpetrated barbaric crimes against the JVP members in the late 1980s, are brought to justice. Most of those who committed crimes during the Mahinda Rajapaksa government have not been brought to justice. Why hasn’t the JVP-led NPP government ordered a thorough probe into the Batalanda torture chamber, where hundreds of JVP members and many others suspects with no links to the JVP suffered painful deaths.

Similarly, it is hoped that all crimes committed by the JVP, such as political assassinations and the destruction of state assets, will also be investigated and the perpetrators thereof made to face the full force of law under a future government.

No crime must be allowed to go unpunished if the prevailing culture of impunity is to be discontinued.

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.