CNCI Achiever Awards 2026

The Ceylon National Chamber of Industries (CNCI) had its official launch and the media briefing of the “CNCI Achiever Awards 2026” for industrial excellence on 5 February, at “Hotel Taj Samudra” Colombo. This year’s awards ceremony will be held for the 25th consecutive time.

The Achiever Awards scheme has been initiated by the CNCI to promote industrial growth in the country by recognising and rewarding those industrialists who excel well in their businesses. The Achiever Awards scheme is highly popular among the industrial sector and is considered a valuable opportunity for all industrialists of Extra Large, Large, Medium, Small, and Micro categories to be contested at provincial and National levels.

The “CNCI Achiever Awards” competition is open for state-owned organisations to compete under the Government Sector category.

CNCI Chairman Pradeep Kahawalage while welcoming the gathering said that the “CNCI Achiever Awards” event has been recognised in the corporate manufacturing and service sectors as a Benchmark of industrial excellence and the main objective of granting these grand awards is to recognise the deserving industries in Sri Lanka.

Chief Guest, University of Sri Jayewardenepura Vice Chancellor Senior Professor. Pathmalal M. Manage said that the contestant companies will be evaluated based on their performance in the areas of quality standards, productivity, corporate plan, research and development, employee benefits, labour relations etc while paying concerns over the social and environmental obligations and to encourage these industries to reach further heights. Alos he emphasised the unwavering commitment of the Ceylon National Chamber of Industries for safeguarding the industries.

CNCI Deputy Chairman and Achiever Awards Judging Chairman Amila Sugathapala highlighted that the applications for the CNCI Achiever Awards are subjected to a stringent evaluation procedure.  Initially, the applications received are scrutinised by an external Audit team and an Internal Panel of Judges will evaluate the applications based on their performances. Finally, the External Panel of Judges, headed by the Vice Chancellor of the University of Sri Jayawardenepura, will scrutinise the whole process/marks obtained by each company, and then final decision will be made.

Achiever Awards applications are available at the Secretariat CNCI, No. 20, Galle Face Court 2, Colombo 3, or they can be downloaded from website www.cnci.lk.