CIPM partners Vavuniya University for 5th Research Conference on Business Studies

CIPM Sri Lanka – the Nation’s leader in human resource management, was a conference partner at the recently concluded 5th Research Conference on Business Studies (RCBS) 2024 organized by the Faculty of Business Studies of the University of Vavuniya. Chartered Fellow Member of CIPM Sri Lanka and Board Member of the Human Resource & Remuneration Committee at the Central Bank of Sri Lanka – C. Hewapattini represented CIPM at this conference participating in the panel discussion titled “Unlocking Business Frontiers: Exploring Innovations and Knowledge Diffusion” which provided deep insights into the latest trends in business, management, and innovation.

“As we unlock business frontiers, the question is no longer ‘What do you know?’ but ‘What can you do with what you know?’. Competence diffusion is the key to turning potential into performance,” said Hewapattini.

He stressed the importance of educational institutions and industries adopting a competency-focused approach, adding that “In today’s rapidly evolving digital world, it’s not just about how much information you can share, but how effectively you can apply that knowledge,”.

Hewapattini further underscored that competencies such as critical thinking, adaptability, and teamwork are becoming crucial for navigating the complexities of the modern workplace, where AI and digital technologies are quickly transforming industries. He further explained that competence diffusion goes beyond the simple exchange of knowledge; it involves developing the skills and behaviours needed to adapt to new challenges, and discussed how AI is playing a key role in providing access to vast amounts of information but emphasized that it’s the human ability to apply that knowledge in innovative and practical ways that truly unlocks new business opportunities.

He also acknowledged the University of Vavuniya for its role in nurturing future-ready graduates, noting that the university not only imparts knowledge but also equips students with the essential competencies to thrive in today’s competitive, tech-driven global economy.

Ably moderated by Prof. N. Kengatharan, Dean of the Faculty of Management & Commerce at the University of Jaffna, the panellists offered profound insights into the topic, sparking a dynamic and engaging discussion. Prof. Kengatharan’s valuable input enriched the dialogue, facilitating a thoughtful exchange of ideas and expertise.

Smartest and most customisable Life Insurance solution for every lifestyle

CSE turnover hits Rs. 7 billion mark accompanied by notable number of crossings

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.