Celebrating World Youth Skills Day – empowering the nation through skilled youth

Youth skills are vital for a country’s development, drive innovation, economic growth, and social progress. Equipping young people with the right skills enables them to participate fully in the economy and contribute to a more prosperous and equitable future.

According to World Bank estimates, the youth unemployment rate in Sri Lanka for 2024 was 22.32% representing the total labour force percentage aged 15-24 who are without work but actively seeking employment.

“Youth empowerment is a cross-cutting theme of the work of John Keells Foundation (JKF), the CSR entity of the John Keells Group”, said Carmeline Jayasuriya, Head of CSR of the John Keells Group. “Within our vision of `Empowering the Nation for Tomorrow’, JKF has been consistently involved in developing youth skills through a range of sustained initiatives that nurture essential life and career skills as well as mindsets, attitudes and values among our youth aimed at shaping a better future for both the beneficiaries and our nation as a whole.”

As JKF celebrates 20 years of ‘Empowering the Nation for Tomorrow’, it remains steadfast in its commitment to fostering equitable opportunities and supportive environments for young people.

Education, Community & Livelihoods, Social Health & Cohesion, and Biodiversity are the four (reclassified) focus areas of John Keells Foundation – the CSR entity of John Keells Holdings PLC (JKH), largest company listed on the CSE in terms of market capitalization operating over 70 companies in 7 diverse industry sectors. With a history of over 150 years, the John Keells Group provides employment to over 18,000 persons and has been ranked as Sri Lanka’s ‘Most Respected Entity’ for the last 19 Years by LMD magazine. JKH has placed first for the fourth consecutive year in the ‘Transparency in Corporate Reporting Assessment’ by Transparency International Sri Lanka. Whilst being a full member of the World Economic Forum and a participant of the UN Global Compact, JKH drives its CSR vision of “Empowering the Nation for Tomorrow” through John Keells Foundation and through the social entrepreneurship initiative, ‘Plasticcycle’, which is a catalyst in significantly reducing plastic pollution in Sri Lanka.

22nd Annual Geoffrey Bawa Memorial Lecture by Frank Escher and Ravi GuneWardena

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.