Sudarshini Fernandopulle to support Sajith

Says Sajith Premadasa has capable and experienced team to serve SL compared to others

Stresses country in dire need of strong leadership and solid program which has moved her to support Premadasa

Claims she had intended to retire but was driven by her conscience to support Premadasa for benefit of SL

Expresses confidence of a Sajith Premadasa win at 21 September election

Sri Lanka Podujana Peramuna (SLPP) Gampaha District MP Dr. Sudarshini Fernandopulle has extended her support to Opposition Leader Sajith Premadasa ahead of the 21 September Presidential election.

Speaking to the media yesterday, Dr. Fernandopulle expressed her decision to support Premadasa, stating that she believes he has a capable and experienced team to serve the country, especially when compared to other candidates and groups that have emerged.

“The country is in dire need of strong leadership and a solid program. I believe that he and his team have the ability to bring about that change,” she said.

Dr. Fernandopulle recounted that she resigned from her position as State Minister in April 2022 because she could not align with the program and policies of her political camp. “I stepped down even before the Aragalaya. I remained in the opposition for two and a half years but did not support any other group. However, my conscience tells me that I can work with Sajith Premadasa and his team,” she remarked.

“I had planned to retire from politics. However, my conscience told me that we have a responsibility in this Presidential election to guide the people in choosing a good leader. We need a new program that will eradicate fraud and corruption and help develop the country,” she said.

The MP added she was confident Premadasa will be elected President.

Dr. Fernandopulle met with Premadasa at the Opposition Leader’s office in Colombo to extend her support to him yesterday. SJB MP Eran Wickramaratne and Premadasa’s wife Jalani Premadasa were also in attendance.

Dr. Fernandopulle is the wife of late Minister Jeyaraj Fernandopulle, a close associate of former President Mahinda Rajapaksa. She was elected to Parliament from the Gampaha district. She has held several senior Government positions, including serving as the State Minister of Primary Health Care, Epidemics, and COVID-19 Disease Control during the Gotabaya Rajapaksa administration.