Making waves … in the Seychelles

The group Mirage, led by drummer and vocalist Donald Pieries, just returned from a little over a month-long engagement in the Seychelles, and reports indicate that it was a happening scene at the Lo Brizan pub/restaurant, Niva Labriz Resort.

The band even adjusted their repertoire to include local and African songs, and New Year’s Eve turned out to be a memorable event for the guests who turned up to usher in 2026.

The scene became active, around 8.00 pm, and the lead up to the dawning of the New Year was nostalgic as the crowd was on the floor, enjoying the music of Mirage.

As the New Year approached, the countdown began and then it was ‘Auld Lang Syne,’with everyone participating in the singing.

Mirage did six nights a week at the Lo Brizan and it was their fourth trip to the Seychelles, and they go back again this year – in April, August, and for the festive season in December.

Guests patronising this outlet, include French, German and Russian tourists, and locals, as well, and the group’s repertoire is made up of songs that include Russian, French and German, and the language spoken in the Seychelles, Creole, with female vocalist Danu being quite adaptive, singing in all four languages.

Many attribute the band’s success to Donald Pieries, including their recent engagement in the Seychelles.

Interestingly, Donald’s been with Mirage through various lineup changes, and he’s currently fronting an extremely talented lineup, made up of Sudham (bass/vocals), Gayan (lead guitar/vocals), Danu (female vocalist) and Toosha (keyboards).

Donald is also quite the family man – his 50th wedding anniversary was recently celebrated in style in the Seychelles.

In Colombo, Mirage will be obliging music lovers every Friday at the Irish Pub.

In fact, they went into action at the Food Harbour, Port City, Colombo, on the 23rd and 24th of this month.

Mirage: Extremely popular with the crowd at the Lo Brizan pub/restaurant, Niva Labriz Resort

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.