The sea is the key

The Police Narcotics Bureau, the Navy, and the Coast Guard have conducted several successful drug busts at sea during recent months. There have also been several chance detections of drug hauls, the latest fortuitous discovery being the one reported yesterday. Fifty-one packages, found floating in the southern seas and brought ashore by the Navy, contained 839 kg of narcotics—670 kg of crystal methamphetamine or ‘ICE’, 156 heroin, and 12 kg of hashish. It is very likely that the ongoing search operations on the southern coast left some drug smugglers with no alternative but to dump their illegal cargo into the sea in the hope of evading interception and retrieving it later.

Narcotics are smuggled into this country mostly via sea routes. A large number of trawlers are involved in drug smuggling, and this fact is borne out by the never-ending turf wars in and around fisheries harbours. Some of these conflicts have gone on for years. There have been numerous instances where narcotics were found in fishing vessels. According to media reports, some of the drug consignments detected in fishing craft are as follows: 77 kg of heroin and 334 g of crystal methamphetamine in a trawler intercepted on the high seas in April 2005; 191 kg and 671 kg of methamphetamine in a trawler in April 2025; 275 kg of heroin and 0.5 kg of methamphetamine in two trawlers in May 2025; 46 kg of heroin in a trawler in Nov. 2024, and 190 kg of heroin in a trawler in June 2024. This shows the gravity of the problem.

It is believed that behind every notorious criminal in this country there is a politician. This is more so where wealthy drug dealers are concerned. Some politicians benefit from the largesse of drug kingpins either wittingly or unwittingly. One may recall that Kudu Lal, who was the main supplier of heroin in Colombo, about two decades ago, was protected by a Minister in the Mahinda Rajapaksa government. Subsequently, the Minister helped the drug dealer flee the country by escorting the latter right up to the boarding area of the BIA. The Opposition has alleged that a few months ago, the NPP government had the mayoral election in the Colombo Municipal Council conducted by secret ballot to enlist the support of two councillors with links to Kudu Lal, among others. Hence the need for such elections to be conducted by open ballot. Kudu Lal was also a municipal councillor. Electors are apparently no better than the elected they condemn for supporting drug dealers.

There is no gainsaying that politicians in league with drug dealers and other criminals must be brought to justice. But anti-drug operations must not be used to cast aspersions on the political opponents of the government in power. If there is irrefutable evidence that politicians are involved in drug smuggling or any other crime, they must be arrested forthwith and prosecuted. Hurling unsubstantiated allegations is certainly not the way to proceed.

The police launched an ambitious operation—‘Yukthiya’—to neutralise the underworld, especially the drug Mafia, during the previous government. It conducted much-publicised raids and arrested thousands of suspects, most of whom were drug addicts. That operation had a quixotic streak, and we warned that the police were barking up the wrong tree because their focus had to be on the fisheries harbours and rogue fishing craft if they were really keen to catch the sharks and not the sprats in the drug trade. But that Operation went on, and the Police Chief who led it had to go home.

Conducting naval operations to block the sea routes used by drug smugglers, with Customs inspections being intensified on cargo that passes through seaports and airports, is half the battle in ridding the country of the scourge of narcotics. The sea is the key.

During the war, the Navy destroyed several rogue vessels full of LTTE’s lethal cargo on the high seas, while keeping the sea supply routes to the North intact by beating the Sea Tigers at their own game. The Navy also has a bigger role to play in the country’s war on drugs, and its strength must not be reduced under any circumstances.

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.