Vietnam embassy meets BOI, biz chamber to strengthen economic links

ECONOMYNEXT  – Vietnam’s embassy in Sri Lanka has met the Board of Investment, Sri Lanka – Greater Mekong Business Council of the Ceylon Chamber of Commerce, to promote links between investors of the two countries, a statement said.

“In a bid to bolster economic diplomacy, the Embassy of Viet Nam in Sri Lanka has been actively engaging with key Sri Lankan agencies and business leaders,” the statement said.

“The Embassy’s proactive efforts aim to unearth the vast potential in the Viet Nam market for Sri Lankan investors and businessmen.

“By promoting trade and investment, countries can leverage each other’s strengths, creating a win-win scenario that fuels economic development.

Economic diplomacy is a policy intensively promoted by the Vietnamese Government and has played an increasingly important role in Viet Nam’s socio-economic development, the embassy said.

Vietnam has achieved high growth and expanded markets using free trade agreements with key trade partners.

“Viet Nam and Sri Lanka share several similarities that can serve as a foundation for enhanced cooperation,” the embassy said.

“Both countries boast young, vibrant populations and strategic geographic locations. They also possess a wealth of natural resources and a strong desire to attract foreign investment and drive industrialization.”

“Recent talks with key Sri Lankan stakeholders also revealed Sri Lanka’s strengths and prospects for international investment incentives, including 15 export processing zones, strategic deep water sea ports and a skilled workforce.”

The Embassy said there was potential and opportunities in infrastructure development, manufacturing, tourism, technology, agriculture education mining, renewable energy and service industries.

There are around 30 Sri Lankan investment projects operating in Viet Nam, primarily in the textile and coconut manufacturing industries.

Vietnam has set up large industrial townships across the nation attracting billions of dollars of foreign investments each year through Becamex IDC, a state corporation and its joint venture with Singapore’s Sembcorp, VSIP.

Vietnam’s stable exchange rate is key to FDI-driven export economy Moody’s says as Sri Lanka downgraded

Becamex is now a public listed company. Its website is available in English, Japanese, Korean and Chinese. (Colombo/Nov25/2025)