Thalapathy’ Vijay announces he’s quitting cinema for full-time politics

Tamil Nadu, Feb 2 (Indiane Epress) - The much-awaited announcement from actor Vijay is finally here. The Tamil star has announced the formation of his political party, Tamizhaga Vetri Kazhagam aka TVK (Tamil Nadu’s Victory Party), and shared a statement on X (formerly Twitter). The title of the party is.

In the long official statement, Vijay said that though his fan club Vijay Makkal Iyakkam has been doing social work for the past many years, there is a need for political power to do the same in a full-fledged manner.

“You all are well aware of the political situation of Tamil Nadu. On one side, we have a dysfunctional administration and corrupt political culture, and on the other, we have divisive politics that aims to divide people along the lines of caste, creed, and religion. Both impede our progress. It is uncontestable truth that people, more so in Tamil Nadu, are longing for a change in a political scenario and want a selfless, honest, secular and talented party to bring about a change,” the statement read.

He further stated, “In this case, it is my long-term intention and desire to help the people of Tamil Nadu and the Tamil community, who gave me name, fame, and everything after my parents, as much as I can.”

Vijay announced that he will be contesting in the 2026 state legislative assembly elections and will pave the way for the ‘desired political transformation sought by the people of Tamil Nadu.’ “Upon the approval of the election ordinance, our party’s policies, manifestos, strategies, and programs will be unveiled, and our political journey for the people of Tamil Nadu will commence,” the statement read.

The Tamil star also confirmed that he will be pursuing politics full time and will quit cinema after he wraps up his current commitment. He is currently acting in Venkat Prabhu’s film Greatest Of All Time, which will become his last film, according to his statement.

“Our party will proceed with the necessary diligence, ensuring that all activities align with the party’s mission and goals, prioritizing the interests of the people of Tamil Nadu. Therefore, my prolonged commitment to politics is not merely a profession but a sacred duty to the people. Politics, in my perspective, is not a pastime; it is my profound endeavor. So, I will complete the project I have accepted now, making sure that it doesn’t affect my political service. And the I will embark on this journey to serve the people of Tamil Nadu fully, without any distractions. That, I believe, is my debt of gratitude to the people of Tamil Nadu.

Meanwhile, he promised that his party members will continue their social work in the grass-root level.