Sri Lanka Federation of University Women celebrates International Women’s Day

The Sri Lanka Federation of University Women (SLFUW) launched an ambitious program for ’International Women’s Day long before 8 March, with a series of projects in line with this year’s UN theme of ‘Invest in Women Accelerate Progress.’

SLFUW President Colonel Dr. Udula Krishnaratne explained that in practical terms this means, ‘Inspire the inclusion of women in every field to forge a better world.’ This conveys the need to ‘provide women and girls with access to quality education and training.’

Thus, the SLFUW has planned to award 16 Scholarships to underprivileged female undergraduates from State Universities, of which one was awarded in advance on 27 February, to a student in dire circumstances due to health problems in the family. The other 15 scholarships will be awarded to coincide with IWD celebrations.

A Career Guidance Course for university students will also be carried out to develop their personality and social skills, thereby enhancing their prospects of employment.

School girls in different age groups and at Advance Level will also be beneficiaries of a similar scheme whereby they would develop the knowledge and skills to face the future, in the University or outside.

In February 2024, the SLFUW visited the Kandauda Panguwa National School in Siyambalanduwa, a low-income area in Moneragala District, and made a cash contribution to procure technical items for its newly constructed Three-Dimensional Open-air Mathematical Laboratory. Scholarships were also awarded to four female students who were most in need, on the recommendation of the Principal.

On 29 February, the President and a few Council Members visited the Dewamulla Temple in Kalutara District for yet another welfare project. Chief Incumbent of the temple, a Senior Lecturer at the University of Ruhuna Rev. Nahalle Wajiragnana Thero had scoured Govinna, the adjacent poor village, and selected women and children from the most poverty-stricken families as recipients of the welfare packs. Apparently, the escalating price level had brought them to destitution, which was written on their faces, but they received a bag of dry groceries, at least a month’s supply of more than 20 essential items, from rice to washing soap, and a cash donation as well. The children received a pack of educational equipment, and a cash donation too.

A donation was made for the medical expenses of the priests in the temple.

Last but not least was the SLFUW’s tree-planting campaign in its premises in Colombo., in line with the UN’s Sustainable Development Goals. A variety of plants, including jak, mee, bread-fruit, cashew, mango, avocado, and king coconut, were planted

so that future generations can ‘get air for free and enjoy the luscious fruit of our motherland.’

The SLFUW sends its greetings to women all over the world, be they young or old, rich or poor, black or white, with the profound wish, ‘May every day be a Women’s Day.’