Marikkar declares Sajith Premadasa the people’s choice

SJB’s S.M. Marikkar describes Ranil Wickremesinghe, Namal Rajapaksa as part of SL’s aristocratic class and AKD as supporter of class

Says upcoming Presidential Election will be battle of SL’s classes and Premadasa is leader of common man

Accuses Govt. of issuing bar permits and handing out financial incentives to secure support

Samagi Jana Balawegaya (SJB) MP and Media Spokesman S.M. Marikkar has declared that within the next 40 days, SJB leader Sajith Premadasa, the leader of the common people, will be elected President.

Speaking at the inaugural rally launching Premadasa’s election campaign in Kurunegala yesterday, Marikkar asserted that not all 39 candidates running in the election are genuine contenders. He noted that, aside from Premadasa, there are only three other serious candidates.

Comparing the three candidates to Premadasa, Marikkar said that President Ranil Wickremesinghe and Sri Lanka Podujana Peramuna (SLPP) candidate Namal Rajapaksa are part of the country’s aristocratic class. He said Anura Kumara Dissanayake, the National People’s Power (NPP) candidate is a bootlicker of the country’s aristocracy. Marikkar accused Dissanayake of supporting Ranil Wickremesinghe in secret.

“Therefore Sajith Premadasa is the only candidate of the people,” he said. He claimed the upcoming Presidential Election will be a battle of the classes.

“Should we allow the rich to become richer, or should we work towards providing a better life for those who are suffering? Should we let the children of the affluent receive superior education while ignoring the needs of the poor, or should we ensure education for all, including the children of the less fortunate? Are we to continue living in a country where the rich collude with aristocratic leaders to exploit, or should we usher in an era where the interests of the poor are prioritised?” he asked. Marikkar said these were the main questions before the voters today.

Marikkar alleged that during the 2015 Good Governance Government, Ranil Wickremesinghe secretly colluded with the Rajapaksas.

He asserted that, unlike the Central Bank bond scam, which was shrouded in secrecy, the current cabinet openly approved the VFS Visa agreement.

He accused the current Government of orchestrating a scam worth Rs. 900 billion, which he claimed was used to secure support through bar permits and other financial incentives. “Despite attempts to buy support, the people are with Sajith,” he maintained.

Marikkar claimed that the majority of Sinhalese, Tamils, Muslims, and grassroots supporters are behind Sajith Premadasa and will ensure his election as President.

He said that this time around, 70 million votes are needed to win. Reflecting on the previous election, he noted that despite the challenges the SJB garnered 5.6 million votes at the time.

Marikkar said therefore Premadasa needs only 1.4 million additional votes to secure a victory, which he believes can be easily obtained from those who previously supported the SLPP. He invited these voters to join the SJB to ensure Sajith Premadasa’s win, predicting that Premadasa would secure 8 million votes.

He also urged the public not to be concerned about the JVP winning. “Last time, they only received 400,000 votes. To win, they would need to attract 6.6 million votes from the SLPP. Therefore, out of every 100 SLPP votes, the JVP would need to secure 94. Will this happen? No, it won’t,” he asserted.

Marikkar also noted Wickremesinghe only received around 29,000 preferential votes at the last general election, even losing out to him.

“Let them squabble over securing a share of the 6.9 million votes. Let the people come together and vote Sajith Premadasa and his team into Government,” he said.