Food, health, education immediate goals of NPP-led Sri Lanka govt: AKD

ECONOMYNEXT — Sri Lanka leftist leader Anura Kumara Dissanayake told an audience of Sri Lankans in Toronto that a government led by his party will ensure that food, health and education are provided uninterrupted while working to change the country’s political culture in order to retain the confidence of voters anticipating overnight change.

Dissanayake said this in response to a question from a female audience member who asked what his party, the National People’s Power (NPP), will do to assuage a vast majority of voters demanding instant change.

“Until there is considerable change in five years or more, we would all have to make a lot of sacrifices. All of us including you must accept that. When a majority of people are anticipating instant change, how might they be able to sustain that expectation over five years and beyond?”, the audience member asked.

Dissanayake responded that, as an immediate measure, an NPP government would provide a a guarantee that food security, education and the supply of medicines are ensured, without asking the people to wait till the government has fixed the economy.

“This cannot be transformed overnight or in one or two years. We must accept that. Coming to power will be the start of this. But we must definitely guarantee to the people three fundamental factors, at the outset. First, food. We can’t say to the people, wait till we’ve formed a government and then built the country until you eat. We can’t say that. So first, we will ensure the food rights of citizens.

“Second, medicine. We can’t say wait till we’ve built the country. [President Ranil Wickremesinghe] says if you have a hole in the heart, wait till 2048 to do your operation. An illness must be treated immediately.

“Thirdly, education. We can’t say wait until the country is developed to educate your child. A child must receive education at the appropriate age. There is no point otherwise,” he said.

“So, education, health and food, the three fundamental needs, we guarantee those to the people at the outset,” he added.

Dissanayake did not, however, elaborate on how a government led by the NPP would sustain this effort. Sri Lanka’s opposition parties including the NPP have been harshly critical of President Ranil Wickremesinghe and his administration’s ongoing reform agenda, accusing the International Monetary Fund (IMF)-backed programme of not providing speedy solutions to people’s everyday problems in the wake of the country’s worst financial crisis in decades.

Once the three basics have been ensured, Dissanayake said, come the long term development plans.

“Then what’s needed is a massive people’s awakening or a rising up. Imagine the feeling when the white man finally left the country in 1948 after over a century of rule? Now imagine the feeling after defeating these leaders of 76 years,’ he said, to applause from the audience.

“The feeling that we were able to finally chase these devils who have robbed and committed crimes away, won’t that give a little kick? I think it will,” he said.

Anti-corruption rhetoric has been a highlight of the NPP’s campaign, though the party’s prominent speakers including Dissanayake himself have been vague on specifics, in terms of legislation required to punish politicians accused of large scale corruption.

This purported awakening of the people must be used to develop the country, he said. To protect this spirit of public awakening, he said, politicians must set the example.

“We have said we will remove pensions, vehicle permits, official residences and excess security. The politician must be an example first,” he said.

Politicians can and should only do what is required of them, said Dissnaanayake, and stop acting like they’re above everyone else.

“Politicians weren’t created through the forehead of Maha Brahma. They think the people came out of his feet and the politicians through his forehead. That’s not the case. They’re the same as other citizens. We’re going to set that example,” he said.

Investigations into allegations of corruption would also figure into keeping voters confident, said Dissanayake.

“Then there is the rule of law. Such things don’t cost a lot. We will establish rule of law at the beginning,” he said.

“There is an economic component to this as well as a political one. We need an economic plan and we also need to change this political culture. Both things exist. The economic one will take some time, but changing the political culture is something that we’re personally tasked with. We’ll change the political culture and I think the voters’ confidence in us will grow even more, and anyone who didn’t vote for us I believe will come to be confident in us,” he said. (Colombo/Mar25/2024)