Sri Lanka main opposition stalwarts waiting to support president, rival parties claim

ECONOMYNEXT — All is not well at Sri Lanka’s main opposition Samagi Jana Balawegaya (SJB) according to several MPs from rival and newly allied parties who claim that a section of SJB stalwarts plan to extend their support to President Ranil Wickremesinghe.

Both Wickremesinghe’s United National Party (UNP) and the ruling Sri Lanka Podujana Peramuna (SLPP) insist that a crossover is imminent.

UNP general secretary Palitha Range Bandara told reporters on Tuesday February 13 that SJB and opposition leader Sajith Premadasa is trying to cobble together an alliance using spent forces even as the forces to be reckoned with in the opposition camp have started to join the president.

“Mr Premadasa cannot move it forward as a political party. What he has to do is make the smart choice and join the president and the UNP and work for the future of the country,” said Bandara.

SLPP parliamentarian Piyal Nishantha told reporters that Premadasa has been collecting politicians who have been rejected by the people and attempting to inflate their worth.

“The most prominent individuals with him will join Mr Wickremesinghe and engage in politics in due course. There is no need to name names. I can guarantee that a large group of Mr Premadasa’s people will definitely come forward to support the government,” said Nisthana.

Critics of the SJB say the party leadership has been cosying up to erstwhile SLPP loyalists who, in the wake of the popular protests that saw the ouster of then President Gotabaya Rajapaksa in 2022, left the government and sat in the opposition benches as independent MPs. Most of these ex-SLPP members, who now make various opposition groupings, were at the forefront of the Rajapaksa campaign in the run-up to the 2019 presidential election.

One such group is the Freedom People’s Congress (FPC) led by MP Dullas Alahapperuma, who Premadasa and the SJB backed in 2022 for the presidency.

FPC member and MP Dilan Perera told reporters on Tuesday that some people in the SJB are attempting to scuttle their efforts at forming a grand alliance with the SJB.

“There may be one or two in our team who are deal makers with Mr Wickremesinghe. The opposition must understand at least now that unity within the opposition is essential,” said Perera.

“We tried to make a grand alliance and make the leader of the SJB the leader of the country. But when we try to do that, MPs in the SJB try to sabotage it,” he said.

No SJB parliamentarian has officially crossed over or has made any public remarks indicating a possible crossover in the past few months. (Colombo/Feb14/2024)