Sri Lanka poverty being addressed by Aswesuma safety net: Minister

ECONOMYNEXT – To alleviate high poverty levels, the country’s income has to increase and the economy must flourish across agriculture, industry, and services sectors, Sri Lanka’s Minister of Transport and Media Bandula Gunawardana has said.

“Several reports indicate a rise in poverty among the most vulnerable citizens in the country. This trend is not surprising given the negative economic growth and subsequent bankruptcy,” Gunawardana told reporters in Colombo, on Wednesday.

“Historically, economic growth correlates with a reduction in poverty and an increase in per capita income.”

A survey conducted by LirneAsia in 2023 among 10,000 people found that Sri Lanka’s population poverty rate surged by 31 percent, driving 4 million poor in 2019 to 7 million poor in 2023. All 9 provinces showed increases in poverty levels.

The report also found that access to social safety nets and welfare programs remain low, with only 36 percent of poor households reported to have received some form of government assistance, while 64 percent did not.

“In the current program with the International Monetary Fund, special attention has been given to the poorest people who were economically endangered during the last crisis,” Gunawardana said.

Aswesuma, Sri Lanka’s welfare program for the poor and vulnerable, is due to make settlements for 2023 to 22.6 percent beneficiaries who qualified for the fund but did not receive payments.

The safety net was introduced last year with the intention of replacing previous such schemes which were politicized and didn’t go to the true needy.

“The Aswesuma program has been launched with an amount three times the amount allocated for the Samurdhi scheme.”

The first disbursements of the fund was made in August and September 2023.

According to Welfare Benefits Board data released to Economy Next in March, following multiple rounds of objections and appeals of applications, the number of eligible beneficiaries stands at 1,894,140.

However, only 1,465,333 beneficiaries have received funds to date, which leaves 22.6 percent beneficiaries waiting for disbursements.

Data from the Welfare Benefits Board given to Economy Next in 2024

Welfare Benefits Board Chairman Jayantha Wijeratne said at the time that the agency was unable to make direct payments to some beneficiaries due to a lack of bank accounts.

Across the categories of beneficiaries; Severely Poor, Poor, Vulnerable and Transient, only 55 percent of Transient category beneficiaries have received cash transfers, leaving 44 percent of beneficiaries pending cash transfers.

Data from the Welfare Benefits Board given to Economy Next in 2024

Sri Lanka secured 185 million dollars in World Bank funding to support the welfare scheme in 2023.

In 2024, the year’s budget allocated 205 billion rupees for welfare payments for the year.

State Minister of Finance Shehan Semasinghe has said beneficiaries will be increased from 1.5 million to 2.4 million. Applications for the second phase of the welfare scheme ended on March 15. (Colombo/Apr4/2024)