Reining in executive juggernaut

Prime Minister Dr. Harini Amarasuriya and Opposition Leader Sajith Premadasa have agreed on the appointment of three civil society (CS) representatives to the Constitutional Council (CC) to succeed Dr. Anula Wijesundere, Dr. Prathap Ramanujam and Prof. Dinesha Samararatne. The new members are Austin Fernando, Prof. Wasantha Seneviratne and Ranjith Ariyaratne, according to media reports.

The new CC appointments have come at a very crucial time. The National Audit Office (NAO) remains headless because the NPP government’s efforts to appoint one of its cronies as the Auditor General (AG) have met with stiff resistance. The CC, by majority decision, rejected three nominations made by President Anura Kumara Dissanayake, who had overlooked the Acting AG, the most eligible candidate in the NAO. Dr. Wijesundere, Dr. Ramanujam and Prof. Samararatne acted as an effective counterweight to the government members of the CC. President Dissanayake kept the NAO without a head. The Opposition claimed that the government was waiting until the departure of the three CS members to manipulate the CC and appoint a person of its choice as the AG.

The three outgoing CS members were instrumental in changing the public perception that the CC was a mere rubber stamp for the Executive. There has been a controversy over the appointment of the head of the Commission to Investigate Allegations of Bribery or Corruption, with the Opposition insisting that the government succeeded in misleading the CC into overlooking the most eligible candidate. However, overall, the three CS representatives carried out their duties and functions commendably well.

The outgoing CS members have set a very high bar. One can only hope that their departure will not help President Dissanayake render the CC malleable, and their successors, together with the Opposition members of the CC will continue to thwart the Executive’s efforts to undermine the independence and integrity of the NAO.

The CC has reportedly declined a Right to Information request for naming its members who voted for and against a person nominated by President Dissanayake for the post of AG. The public has a right to know how the CC members vote in respect of vital appointments. Nevertheless, information about voting at CC meetings cannot be kept secret; it is leaked to the media.

A protracted delay in appointing the AG or the elevation of a crony of the government to that post will increase the risk of mismanagement of state funds, erode public trust and confidence in the NAO, undermine legislative oversight and impair fiscal discipline. Most of all, the government’s failure to appoint a competent, independent person of integrity as AG will diminish donor confidence, especially at a time when the country is seeking funds from the international community for disaster relief and rebuilding. There is no way the government can justify its refusal to appoint the Acting Auditor General as the head of the supreme audit institution. There are other deserving officials in the NAO, and they must not be overlooked.

The Bar Association of Sri Lanka has called upon President Dissanayake to appoint a person with proven competence, integrity, and independence, who commands wide acceptance as the Auditor General forthwith. It has stressed the need to appoint a nonpartisan professional to that post to safeguard the integrity of the NAO and inspire the confidence of both citizens and international partners in the financial governance of the State. Transparency International Sri Lanka, the Civil Society Organisations and the other good governance activists, too, have faulted President Dissanayake and his government for the inordinate delay in appointing AG.

Sri Lanka’s experience with all supermajority governments has been a very bitter one. Hence the need for effective countervailing forces to keep them in check. It is hoped that the CC, with the help of its newly appointed CS representatives, will retain its integrity and independence and live up to people’s expectations by reining in the executive juggernaut careening downhill and bearing down on all democratic institutions.

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.