Flaws in laws

The Parliamentary Select Committee (PSC) on Reviewing Election Laws, which recently had its first meeting under the chairmanship of the Minister of Public Administration, Provincial Councils and Local Government, Prof. A. H. M. H. Abayarathna, has reportedly decided to seek public views on the election law review process. Reviewing election laws as well as modernising them to reflect present-day needs is a long-felt need. The PSC deserves the fullest public cooperation.

The PSC has been tasked with reviewing election laws, including the Registration of Electors Act, the Local Authorities Elections Ordinance, the Parliamentary Elections Act, the Presidential Elections Act, as well as amendments to those laws over the years and special legislative provisions relevant to their implementation. It will also evaluate the need to revise, amend and consolidate the laws and to recommend necessary reforms and amendments to the current legal framework governing elections. It has the authority to summon any individual, order the submission of any document or report and obtain evidence either in writing or orally.

Much is being spoken these days about law’s delays and ongoing efforts to clear a massive backlog of court cases. Of equal concern are the flaws in laws, and complaints abound that they even stand in the way of effective enforcement. There is a need for a wider public discussion on these issues. However, the focus of this comment is on some glaring deficiencies in election laws and how they have adversely impacted people’s franchise, a fundamental component of representative democracy.

An unauthorised change effected to election laws has had a corrosive effect on the Constitution itself. It has enabled the political parties and their leaders to circumvent the Constitution and abuse the National List (NL) mechanism to catapult persons of their choice to Parliament. There is hardly any political party that has not benefited from it.

Article 99A of the Constitution allows the persons whose names are included in the lists submitted to the Commissioner of Elections or in any nomination paper submitted in respect of any electoral district by political parties or independent groups at elections to be appointed to Parliament via the NL. This provision led to the sordid practice of many defeated candidates entering Parliament. One may recall that UNP leader Ranil Wickremesinghe, who failed to secure enough votes at the 2020 general election to represent the people of Colombo, entered Parliament via the NL, became President and exercised control over all three tiers of government, Parliament, the provincial councils and the local government authorities. True, he was instrumental in managing the worst-ever economic crisis, and the country gained from his NL appointment, which however is the exception that proves the rule. Even incompetent persons can enter Parliament via the NL.

A UNP government did something even worse in 1988, when a general election was held under the Proportional Representation (PR) system for the first time in this country. It introduced Section 64(5) of the Parliament Elections Act, inter alia, as an urgent Bill, severely eroding the essence of the constitutional provisions pertaining to the NL and people’s franchise. Parliament Elections Act, No 1 of 1981, as amended in 1988, allows ‘any member’ of a political party to be appointed to fill an NL vacancy. This section has enabled political parties to make NL appointments, as stipulated by the Constitution, and then engineer vacancies and bring in persons of their choice as NL MPs. It is now a fait accompli because there is no legal provision for post-enactment judicial review of legislation. Worse, it has been alleged that the words, “any person” were inserted after the ratification of the amendment Bill.

It is hoped that the PSC, tasked with reviewing election laws, will care to ensure that the Parliamentary Elections Act is rid of the questionable section that adversely impacts franchise and even undermines the Constitution.

There is also a need to overhaul the Provincial Council Elections (Amendment) Act, which was stuffed with unauthorised sections at the committee stage in 2017 to pave the way for the indefinite postponement of the Provincial Council elections. What Parliament passed was a textbook Christmas Tree Bill.

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.