CA Sri Lanka unveils “Legacy Lane” history wall to celebrate 65th anniversary

CA Sri Lanka Legacy Lane being declared open by President Heshana Kuruppu, Vice President Tishan Subasinghe, Immediate Past President Sanjaya Bandara

The Institute of Chartered Accountants of Sri Lanka (CA Sri Lanka) has marked its 65th anniversary with the unveiling of a history wall, aptly named “Legacy Lane,” as a tribute to its illustrious journey since its establishment in 1959.

Officially launched on 13 December 2024 by CA Sri Lanka President Heshana Kuruppu and Vice President Tishan Subasinghe, in the presence of members of the council and staff, the “Legacy Lane” offers a nostalgic glimpse into CA Sri Lanka’s remarkable past since its establishment by an Act of Parliament in 1959.

The 65th anniversary celebrations began on the morning of 13 December with a multi-religious observance, bringing together blessings from all faiths. This was followed by the launch of the Legacy Lane history wall and concluded with an all-night pirith ceremony on 14 December.

CA Sri Lanka President Kuruppu, said that for 65 years, CA Sri Lanka has been a pioneering force, setting benchmarks in the accounting profession, fostering innovation, and nurturing generations of Chartered Accountants who have made a lasting impact locally and globally. “As we look to the future, guided by the 65th anniversary theme, ‘Lead, Thrive, and Sustain,’ CA Sri Lanka remains dedicated to leading with vision, thriving through innovation, and sustaining the extraordinary legacy of our journey,” Kuruppu said.

Tishan Subasinghe said the launch of Legacy Lane is a proud moment for CA Sri Lanka as the Institute celebrates 65 years of excellence and commitment to the accounting profession. “This exhibit not only showcases our rich history and milestones but also serves as a tribute to the vision and dedication of those who have shaped our journey,” he said.

Speaking at the event, CA Sri Lanka Chief Executive Officer Lakmali Priyangika said the Legacy Lane is a tribute to the rich heritage of CA Sri Lanka and the unwavering commitment of its members, who have been integral in shaping the Institute’s legacy. She also thanked everyone for contributing the historical items that hold significance to the Institute’s past.

The Legacy Lane features invaluable artefacts and milestones that showcase the Institute’s journey, including the inaugural Accountancy Journal from 1966-1967, examination papers from 1969 and 1978, and the Banking in Ceylon publication of 1963. The wall also features the Glossary of Accounting Terms in English and Tamil from 1974, the agenda from the ceremonial opening of the Institute’s new building by the late Hon. Lalith Athulathmudali in 1979, the Silver Jubilee Publication from 1984, and the Founders Day Publication of 1999. Other notable items include the First Day Stamp Cover commemorating the 50th anniversary (2009), technical papers from the inaugural National Conference in 1980, and a collection of CA Sri Lanka syllabi, handwritten notes, and annual reports dating back to several decades ago.

In a heartfelt gesture of honouring its history and legacy, CA Sri Lanka also awarded a scholarship to R.A. Minsadi Yosodhya Rupasinghe, the granddaughter of Vimaladasa Rupasinghe, the very first employee of CA Sri Lanka. Rupasinghe, a former student of Holy Cross College in Gampaha is currently pursuing her studies in the Business Level of CA Sri Lanka.

Members and staff of CA Sri Lanka at multi-religious blessing ceremony

Priests from all four main faiths conducting multi-religious blessing ceremony

Minsadi Yosodhya Rupasinghe (third from left), granddaughter of Vimaladasa Rupasinghe, the very first employee of CA Sri Lanka, receiving a scholarship