Microsoft hosts ‘Scaling AI at Work’ to drive AI-first innovation for Sri Lankan businesses

Microsoft ignited the ‘Scaling AI at Work’ event in Sri Lanka on 26 November 2024, providing a dynamic platform for key customers and partners to delve into the transformative potential of AI. The event showed how Microsoft AI is sparking success among its customers, effectively enriching employee experience and driving business processes with the use of an AI platform that is secure, safe, and private.

Dr. Rohini Srivathsa, Chief Technology Officer for Microsoft India and South Asia, led a power track on ‘The Art of Possible with AI for Productivity’. In her session, Dr. Srivathsa discussed the extensive suite of AI models accessible through the Microsoft platform, emphasizing that unlocking its true potential hinges not only on the prompts customers use, but also the context of one’s work. She elaborated on how AI is reshaping business transformation and the critical importance of responsible AI practices, reaffirming Microsoft’s stance on protecting customer data.

Speaking on the efficacy of AI in driving value, Dr. Srivathsa said, “Microsoft runs on trust. We aim to empower our customers to bend the curve on innovation with AI Copilots, driving efficiency through comprehensive cutting-edge systems. We’re changing the way innovation is done, effectively helping our customers accelerate their transformation in the age of AI with a platform that is secure by design to reshape collaborative businesses, processes and decision making.”

A key highlight was how Microsoft 365 Copilot enhances productivity by saving time, automating routine work, thereby freeing workforces to pursue higher priority goals with the potential of creating significant impact.

The event explored how Copilot is actively helping organizations create new business opportunities, optimize capital management, and improve profitability while reducing operational costs by eliminating the need for external support and third-party AI tools. Copilot users reported saving 30 minutes a day, equating to 10 hours per month, highlighting the value of AI in everyday business operations.

Trust and security were central themes throughout the event. Speakers underscored the importance of implementing robust security measures alongside AI adoption. In line with this, a panel discussion titled ‘Creating Customer Delight by Optimizing Processes with Utmost Security’, moderated by Harsha Randeny, Country Manager for Microsoft Sri Lanka and Maldives, explored real-world success stories of businesses achieving operational efficiency through AI-powered solutions.

Political Stability Paves the Way for a Favorable Investment Environment in the Country – President

The George Keyt Foundation unveils a distinguished line-up of Sri Lankan artists for upcoming auction conducted by Sotheby’s

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.