Baurs Healthcare marks 80 years of medical excellence and innovation in Lanka

Baurs Healthcare, the healthcare division of A. Baur & Co. (Pvt) Ltd., widely known as Baurs, a leading conglomerate with diversified business interests in Sri Lanka and a pioneer and innovator in various industry verticals, proudly celebrates its 80th anniversary this year, coinciding with the 128th anniversary of its parent company.

Since its establishment in 1945, Baurs Healthcare has been dedicated to raising the standard of healthcare in Sri Lanka by ensuring access to world-class medicines, medical technologies, diagnostics, surgical equipment, and medical nutrition. The division’s continued commitment to precision, ethics, and Swiss-quality values has laid the foundation for nearly eight decades of excellence. Going beyond, the company’s dedication to the holistic wellbeing of communities aligns business success with societal impact.

Over the years, Baurs Healthcare has forged strategic partnerships with a wide array of global healthcare leaders. The company represents and distributes top international brands such as GSK, Fresenius Medical Care, Nestlé Health Science, Roche, Sanofi, Isispharma, OMRON, Viatris (formerly Mylan), Sandoz, Ajanta Pharma, Novartis, Alcon, Mega, Merck, Dexa, Eisai, MSD, Encube, CheplaPharm, Johnson & Johnson, Apex, Vitrolife, Unichem, Rohto, Medtronic, Welch Allyn, Becton Dickinson, and Geister, among many others. These strategic alliances have played a pivotal role in ensuring that Sri Lankans from all walks of life have access to the highest quality healthcare solutions.

“In celebration of these milestones—80 years of our healthcare division and 128 years of the Baurs legacy—we reaffirm our mission to elevate healthcare accessibility, quality, and affordability throughout the nation. We are proud to serve as a conduit between the global medical innovation frontier and the people of Sri Lanka,” said Rolf Blaser, CEO/Managing Director of Baurs. “Our success is a testament to the trust placed in us by our principals, partners, hospitals, and, most importantly, the patients we serve.”

“Our sustained growth and deep relationships with our principals, institutions and our wider stakeholder network stem from decades of dependable service, quality, and a shared vision for national health improvement. We take pride in our ability to support critical therapeutic and emergency needs at scale” remarked Nishantha Weerasinghe, Deputy MD and Director of Healthcare at Baurs.

Melwa introduces its latest product, SLS 414 certified first welding rod in Sri Lanka

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.