ISF launches world’s 1st fully automated coconut dewatering system

Sri Lankan engineering and technology company ISF, with bold ambitions in manufacturing artificial intelligence (AI), has officially launched the world’s first fully automated coconut dewatering system.

The system improves productivity, reduces labour dependency and addresses operational inefficiencies across the coconut processing industry, while improving return on investment.

Designed and manufactured in Sri Lanka by the local engineers, the system automates a process that has traditionally relied on manual handling.

The system was unveiled through a live demonstration attended by Science and Technology Minister Prof. Chrishantha Abeysena, diplomats representing ISF’s key international markets, industry leaders and members of the media.

The participants were given the opportunity to observe the technology in operation and understand the key benefits it offers to the coconut processors.

ISF Director Anjula Sivakumaran said, “I am proud to have designed, tested and launched this automated coconut dewatering system. My clients in Indonesia and the Philippines are delighted with this innovation and this particular machine will be shipped to the Philippines in a few weeks. My team of engineers will be travelling there to oversee the installation and provide after-sales support.

This forms part of my vision to help regional and local firms to automate their operations so that they can compete globally. I also want to realise this vision by leveraging Sri Lanka’s outstanding engineering talent. In doing so, we will help the customers achieve their commercial goals through a very short return on investment.

“We continue to develop technologies across the entire coconut processing value chain, including dehusking, deshelling and paring. By combining engineering expertise, automation and AI, I aim to create solutions that solve difficult business problems. I am proud that we continue to invest in pioneering technologies through extensive research and development, while working closely with our global partners.”

Established in 1977, ISF has evolved from a manufacturing company into a provider of complete technology, engineering, automation and process solutions serving the dairy, coconut, food, pharmaceutical, chemical and FMCG industries.

“My goal is to help transform companies in Sri Lanka and across the region to global standards at a fraction of the cost charged by the Western technology companies.”