El Niño: Misplaced priorities

Paddy fields are drying up in some parts of the country, especially in the dry zone, and farmers are demanding relief. Some farmers’ associations have claimed that funds have not been allocated for the programmes underway to mitigate the El Niño impact. Opinion may be divided on whether the prevailing dry spell is due to the unfolding El Niño event, but the fact remains that farmers have suffered crop losses in some parts of the country; the situation is taking a turn for the worse, and above all, urgent action must be taken to help the victims.

The Water Management Secretariat, a specialised technical body within the Mahaweli Authority of Sri Lanka, has stated that water levels in major reservoirs remain above the average recorded for the corresponding periods in previous years. This may be true, but the possibility of water levels receding fast if the current dry spell expands to their catchments cannot be ruled out. The Victoria reservoir’s water storage has already dropped 35% of capacity. A severe generation shortfall at the Norochcholai power complex due the use of substandard coal has made the country heavily dependent on hydropower plants, with more water having to be released from the major reservoirs for power generation. Increasing demand for water for irrigation and domestic consumption will also impact the reservoir storages. How do the irrigation authorities and the government propose to face such an eventuality? The need for a contingency plan cannot be overstated.

The Irrigation Department has said farmers in Hambantota, Moneragala, Ampara, Anuradhapura, Polonnaruwa and the Northern Province have been affected by a severe shortage of water. While the people in these areas are facing water woes, the Meteorological Department has forecast a rainfall above 100 mm in the south-western parts of the country. Weather patterns can become even more erratic due to El Niño conditions, which could cause droughts and floods in different parts of the country simultaneously, affecting the national food production and triggering natural disasters. Hence, the need to be prepared.

Meanwhile, Minister of Agriculture. Livestock, Land and Irrigation K. D. Lal Kantha has reiterated the government’s position that it will allow rice to be used for manufacturing beer and animal feed while many people are experiencing food issues; some of them sleep on empty stomachs. Addressing a farmers’ meeting on Thursday, Minister Lal Kantha said animal feed manufacturers were facing difficulties as the government had imposed restrictions on maize imports, and therefore it had been decided to allow rice to be used by them. He however stopped short of mentioning that the government had also allowed breweries to use rice for manufacturing beer.

Sri Lanka is already facing serious food issues, as is public knowledge. According to the World Food Programme data, about 39% of Sri Lankan households are without adequate diets; the situation has worsened following the impact of Cyclone Ditwah, including disrupted livelihoods, displacement and restricted market access. What action has the government taken to help those who are struggling to dull the pangs of hunger? It boasts that the Treasury is now overflowing and there are ‘tonnes and tonnes of money’. If so, why doesn’t it utilise some of those funds that belong to the people to buy more paddy from farmers, who are struggling to dispose of their produce at fair prices, and build buffer stocks of paddy, instead of encouraging farmers to sell rice to brewers and manufacturers of animal feed?

Ensuring the country’s food security, especially amidst a highly unpredictable El Niño event, must be at the top of the government’s list of priorities.

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.