Congratulations …and celebrations

Yes, of course, congratulations and celebrations would have taken top billing on the night of Sunday, 28th July, 2024, when the all-conquering Sri Lanka Women’s Cricket team triumphed over the mighty Indians…beating them by eight wickets to clinch the Women’s Asia Cup final.

It was a great win, indeed, as India has won the Cup seven times since the commencement of this tournament in 2004.

Social media was inundated with bouquets and congratulatory messages, and some of our popular figures, in the showbiz scene, were also keen to express their views on Sri Lanka’s historic win, and this is what they had to say:

What a fantastic win for our Sri Lankan women’s cricket team. Fearless, inspiring and well determined captainship, and teamwork, brought us victory. Awesome ladies…pride of Sri Lanka. This should inspire not only women’s cricket, but all women in Sri Lankan society. Just awesome.

*  Ishini Fonseka (Psychologist and band leader – Ishini & The Branch):

The power of women is once again proven! Congratulations to the SL Women’s Cricket team on winning the Women’s Asia Cup 2024! Proud to the very core of my heart that our strong ladies were able to show their team spirit, strength and power to the world! The power of a woman (alone) is Flammable. Yet the power of Strong Women Together is Highly Flammable!! A big thank you to our powerful women’s cricket team!!!

The improvement of our women’s cricket team, led by Chamari Athapaththu, has taken our country to different heights. As they march forward towards the World Cup, from the Asia Cup victory, I personally believe that they should be rewarded with a small vehicle each to make them comfortable with their transportation. While thanking them for keeping the Sri Lankan flag flying high and making all of us proud, with the least facilities, I wish them all the very best for the World Cup.

*  Raffealla Fernando (Founder & CEO at Raffealla Fernando Photography and Fashion Designer and Stylist at Raffealla):

Watching the Sri Lankan Women’s Cricket team play in the finals of the Women’s Asia Cup was like a breath of fresh air. Sri Lanka had not seen such s victory in cricket for a very long time. So proud of our iron women for showing the real meaning of hard work, persistent, discipline, amazing leadership qualities and pure class. As a woman, I couldn’t have been more proud of our ladies. More power to them to keep winning the world and make Sri Lanka proud.

Great win, SL lady cricketers. Much love and congrats, sisters. At a time where we lost our prestige as a proud Cricket Nation, our Women Cricket has brought it back. Sports always has its ‘The BEST will Win’ situation, but one must never mix up sports with money, politics, favours, etc.. Hard work, team spirit, dedication, and best decisions will lead us again to play great cricket. Blessings!

“I am absolutely thrilled to see our Sri Lankan Women’s Cricket team making waves on the international stage! Their dedication, skills, and teamwork are a true testament to the spirit of Sri Lankan women. And captain Chamari (Chamari is a strong, powerful lucky name, too), you’re a true role model for young Sri Lankans everywhere – showing them that with hard work and determination, they can achieve greatness. As a proud Sri Lankan, I am honoured to see them bringing glory to our nation. Keep pushing boundaries, keep breaking records, continue to shine on the world stage, and keep making us proud, our lionesses.

* Shareefa Thahir (Freelance TV presenter and news anchor at Rupavahini, English announcer and news reader at SLBC, and compere):

Sri Lanka’s incredible win in the Women’s Asia Cup final has reignited my passion for cricket. Chamari Athapaththu, Harshitha Samarawickrama, and Kavisha Dilhari played brilliantly, showing that our team can take on anyone. Their determination and skill filled me with pride and brought back my love for the game. This historic victory is a big moment for Sri Lankan Women’s Cricket, and it’s also inspiring to see our athletes shine, as well. I’d like to thank them for bringing pride to the nation.

Lankan Lionesses reign supreme, defeating India to claim Asia Cup glory 2024. Yes, this is what Sri Lanka is all about – fighting till the end and staying positive! Congratulations to Chamari Athapaththu and our lionesses for bringing the Cup home. You’ve made the entire nation proud.

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.