Sanasa Life Insurance launches new child insurance policy with additional benefits

Sanasa Life Insurance recently launched a new plan that builds upon the success of their existing child insurance policy, Senehasa.

Senehasa is a popular choice for parents due to its high returns and low monthly premiums, which aligns perfectly with Sanasa Life Insurance’s core values of affordability and accessibility.” Mahesh Wickramatunga, Head of Marketing stated.

“The new theme ‘Promise of a Mother’s Love’ includes all the benefits of the existing Senehasa insurance scheme as well as additional benefits for a child’s future. Here are some of these innovative inclusions: If the child passes the Grade 5 scholarship examination, he/she will be entitled to future educational scholarships based on their scholarly performance at the GCE Ordinary Level and Advanced Level examinations.

If they excel at any sport, the policy offers sponsorship for training, as well as many other privileges. Sanasa Life Insurance is making it easier for mothers and parents to secure their child’s future with the ‘Promise of a Mother’s Love’ policy. This comprehensive insurance plan will be available across Sanasa’s extensive island-wide network of 8,500 branches. To ensure convenient access, especially for new mothers, arrangements have already been made to introduce the plan through MOH clinics catering to expectant mothers.

Edith Cowan University Sri Lanka Campus launches Bachelor of Science in Nursing Studies

Sanasa Life Insurance launches ‘Promise of a Mother’s Love’ child insurance policy

Sanasa Life Insurance secures double winnings at the annual CPM Awards 2024

Sanasa Life Insurance partners with SLAF rugby team for second consecutive season

Sanasa Life Insurance launches eight training centres across the island

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.