Further evidence in bribery case against Kumara Jayakody fixed for October 5

Colombo, Sep. 7 (Daily Mirror) - Colombo High Court Judge Rasantha Godawela ordered that the further trial of evidence in the case filed by the Commission to Investigate Allegations of Bribery or Corruption (CIABOC) against former Energy Minister Kumara Jayakody over an alleged corruption offence be taken up on October 5.

Former Chairman of Lanka Fertilizer Company, Buddhika Ruwan Madihahewa, who testified under the direction of CIABOC Deputy Director General Asitha Anthony, told court that a procurement process had been initiated in 2014 to select a bidder to carry out the carpeting of roads at the Hunupitiya warehouse complex of Lanka Fertilizer Company.

The witness further stated that the accused, Kumar Jayakody, had been serving as the Procurement Manager of the company at the time.

He testified that following the procurement process, a company named D.S. Construction was selected to carry out the road carpeting project. An advance payment of Rs. 8.8 million had subsequently been made to the company against an advance payment guarantee, the witness said.

The witness stated that he had approved the payment after examining documents submitted by the Procurement and Finance Divisions confirming that the relevant procurement procedures had been followed properly.

However, the witness admitted that the company had failed to carry out the carpeting work. He further revealed that materials, including rubble brought to the premises for the project, had been left within the company premises.

He further testified that subsequently, only Rs. 2.2 million had been recovered under the advance payment guarantee provided by the company.

Thereafter, a legal officer of the National Audit Office also gave evidence before court.

The Colombo High Court subsequently ordered that further hearing of evidence in the case will be taken up on October 5.

The CIABOC had filed the case against the former Minister alleging that while serving as the Procurement Manager of Lanka Fertilizer Company in 2014, he had caused a loss of Rs. 8.8 million to the Government by carrying out procurement activities relating to the carpeting of the company's warehouse premises in a manner favourable to a private company.