Sri Lanka opens maternity hospital in Galle with Germany’s help

ECONOMYNEXT – The German-Sri Lanka Friendship New Women’s Hospital, a six-story hospital with 640 beds, 6 operating theatres, infant intensive care units, paediatric units, and state-of-the-art facilities was opened in the southern city of Galle.

The German government contributed 25 million euro (3,570 million rupees) to the project, in addition to medical equipment.

Former Chancellor of Germany, Helmut Kohl, made a significant donation towards the construction of the maternity hospital after witnessing the devastation caused by the tsunami to Mahmodara Hospital Galle, during his vacation in December 2004 in Talpe, Habaraduwa.

“The future holds no promise without innovation in education and healthcare. The robustness of our healthcare system is a testament to our medical services,” President Ranil Wickremesinghe said at the inauguration.

“By securing adequate funding for healthcare and education, we will foster rapid progress in these domains,” Wickremesinghe was quoted by he media division.

“With the rise in the elderly population and the emergence of various health issues, the complexities in the healthcare sector have escalated. Hence, it is imperative to adapt and transform our healthcare services to meet these evolving challenges effectively.

The hospital also features emergency treatment units, intensive care units, laboratories, and a water purification and recycling unit.

“May this hospital be a resounding success, and I offer my congratulations to all the staff involved. Germany has long been a friend of Sri Lanka, and our friendship remains steadfast,” German Ambassador to Sri Lanka Dr Felix Neumann said on the occasion.

Sri Lanka’s healthcare professionals possess the expertise to perform exceptional surgeries, underscoring the quality of healthcare services available in our country, officials said at the event.

“Karapitiya Hospital, renowned for its advanced technology and size, ranks second only to the Colombo National Hospital. The inauguration of the maternity hospital today marks a significant expansion of Karapitiya Hospital’s services,” Health Minister Dr Ramesh Pathirana said. (Colombo/Mar27/2024)