Sri Lanka Freedom Party anti-Sirisena faction says its appointments are legal

ECONOMYNEXT — The faction of the Sri Lanka Freedom Party (SLFP) that’s opposed to former president Maithripala Sirisena has said its appointments to the party hierarchy are now legal in light of a fresh verdict by the Court of Appeal.

“So our appointments are legal, is what we say,” SLFP acting chairman and Aviation Minister Nimal Siripala de Silva said speaking to reporters.

He made this remark after the Court of Appeal reportedly rejected a petition filed by Minister of Justice Wijeyadasa Rajapakshe challenging an injunction order by the Colombo District Court preventing him from functioning as the SLFP’s acting chairman.

According to media reports, the Court of Appeal had said the relevant orders in that regard should be obtained from the District Court.

The Colombo District Court issued a restraining order against Rajapakshe in April, after the pro-Sirisena faction appointed him acting chairman of the crisis-hit party. The order was issued following a plaint submitted by Minister Mahinda Amaraweera, State Minister Lasantha Alagiyawanna and MP Duminda Dissanayake, all of whom are opposed to Sirisena.

Amaraweera claimed at a press conference on April 23 that Rajapakshe’s appointment as acting chairman was made by a group of people that do not represent the party’s executive committee.

“We are reliably informed that there was some coercing and threats. There was also the involvement of the security detail deployed for former presidents,” Amaraweera claimed.

The minister represents a faction of the SLFP that opposes former President Sirisena, whom the Colombo District Court had previously issued an enjoining order against, preventing him from serving as SLFP chairman.

Sirisena was replaced by Aviation Minister Nimal Siripala de Silva, whom the anti-Sirisena faction of the SLFP politburo appointed.

Meanwhile, Minister Rajapakshe has indicated that he plans to contest the upcoming presidential election.

If he decides to contest, Rajapakshe will face the challenge of a formidable campaign already underway by the leftist National People’s Power (NPP), with the main opposition Samagi Jana Balawegaya (SJB) not far behind.

President Ranil Wickremesinghe, whose cabinet Rajapaskhe is a key member of, has yet to officially announce his candidacy, but Wickremesinghe’s United National Party (UNP) insists that he definitely intends to run.

Sri Lanka’s next presidential election should be held between September 17 and October 17, according to the constitution. (Colombo/May08/2024)