Navigating ourselves out

This may be cynical posturing on my part, but recent announcements about Sri Lanka’s debt restructuring process reeks of a somewhat widespread tendency to credit everything to the political leadership at the cost of the suffering many. Legitimate concerns have been raised about whether Sri Lanka could have negotiated better; the debt haircut Ghana settled for, to give one example, is miles away from Sri Lanka’s figure. The extent of our haircut leaves us with very little breathing space. To stick to it, we need to engage in savage austerity, or more of what we have been inflicting on ourselves for the last two years.

Foreign embassies have, of course, been largely welcoming of these negotiations. The IMF has been touted as a viable solution and, at least in the Global North plus India, it is seen as a way out for Sri Lanka. But the congratulations and the wishes that have accompanied recent developments – for instance, the “critical milestone” that Treasury Secretary Mahinda Siriwardena claims for the finalization of agreements with the Official Creditors Committee (OCC) and China’s Exim Bank – undermines and casts aside the opposition that these reforms have generated. More problematically, they reveal an attitude to economic issues facing Sri Lanka that seems neither farsighted nor sensitive.

It goes without saying that Sri Lanka’s debt fallout was unique in many ways. It involved China’s alleged debt trap diplomacy, India’s hegemonizing tendencies, and US-origin international sovereign bonds. In other words, the economic crisis had geopolitics written all over it, which today has constrained it from acting in the way other countries in the Global South have. Those who tout Malaysia under Mahathir Mohamed as an example we can emulate forget that the Malaysian State had the wherewithal, will, and intelligence to seek a sustainable alternative path. Indeed, the IMF in its press engagements has constantly stated that they are willing to listen to any alternatives, provided they are workable.

Of course, the IMF has its own experts and they have their own interpretation of what is “workable.” This isn’t always palatable, but it has been accepted by the government, and for better or worse policies that would have been unthinkable a generation ago are being forced down the country’s throat. One could say the government has gone beyond IMF mandates: the IMF, for instance, has left room for “social assistance spending”, yet at least one political analyst has pointed out that social assistance levels here are below what they should be. Malnutrition has become more pervasive than ever, while removal of subsidies has impacted the poor, particularly in terms of public utilities.

Sri Lanka’s agreement with EXIM Bank is, of course, the deal-clincher: for years the Western media and at least one government MP framed China as the sole obstacle in the way of economic recovery. China probably had good reasons for delaying and dithering: it may not have wanted to give other debt-ridden countries carte blanche to seek debt relief if not forgiveness. On the other hand, when it comes to Sri Lanka, China has understood – as India did years if not decades ago – that the government is simply not reliable. This is what has pushed them to try other forms of engagement, including grassroots contact. Whether that works out in the long term remains to be seen.

It took an economic crisis of this nature to force Beijing to think differently. In a perceptive piece written to Factum in August 2021 – that is, a good half year before the crisis – Omar Rajarathnam noted that, while China was deploying new forms of outreach, its engagements were fundamentally “politicians-oriented.” There were probably good reasons for this, in particular the government-corporation collusion that has become a feature of development projects in Sri Lanka. Yet it goes without saying that Sri Lanka’s decision to sway the other way and go to the IMF, even though it spent months telling the world that it had no need to do so, doubtless rang alarm bells in Beijing.

Today, the stridently anti-IMF SLPP has become virtual gatekeepers of IMF reforms. Led by a president who has, for the better part of his career, been associated with neoliberal orthodoxy, the SLPP has become a hostage to its own internal dilemmas. Its engagements with the IMF reveal the contradictions of nationalist politics in the Global South, and particularly South Asia. Notwithstanding rebel SLPPers’ denunciations of its economic policies, the government did not really know how to rescue Sri Lanka from the fallout of the pandemic. If it did, it did not believe in its own solutions.

In that sense, the ongoing debt restructuring talks reveal two things about Sri Lanka, namely the geopolitics underlying the country and the economy, and the inability of Sri Lanka’s political class to think beyond the same old proposals and reforms. One should, of course, acknowledge that the geopolitics of the region would hinder the most strategic politician’s efforts at forging a way out. In that sense, to some extent at least, the political leadership should be given the benefit of the doubt. Yet the backlash recent reforms have provoked, and the countermeasures the government has taken – including the Online Safety Bill – has drained the regime of what little supported it used to court.

History is never linear; it is circular and cyclical. What Sri Lanka is going through is something other countries from other periods have gone through. The situation has become almost routine: an economy drowning in debt, trying to atone for its proverbial sins by inflicting as much pain and austerity as it can on itself, and winning international goodwill at the cost of domestic support. In each and every case, the political class gave the impression of trying to shield itself, and the geopolitics of a particular place and time – Latin and Central America in the 1980s, Pakistan and Africa today – restrained it from enforcing reforms to ward off an even worse crisis. How Sri Lanka navigates itself out of this conundrum is left to be seen. Not a few are skeptical of its prospects. But then, miracles do happen.

Biden celebrates July 4 amid doubts about his political future

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.