Opposition Leader asks when the Executive Presidency will be abolished

Opposition Leader Sajith Premadasa questioned the Government’s view on the abolition of the Executive Presidency system and said that the date for that should be presented to Parliament.

“If the Government intends to carry out a Constitutional amendment as stated on page 194 of the NPP’s policy statement, it is necessary to know whether the process has been initiated and when the Parliament will be involved in the Constitutional amendment process.”

Addressing the House questioning the government yesterday (24), the Opposition Leader said that the Constitution of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka states that the sovereignty of the Republic of Sri Lanka lies with the people and that sovereignty cannot be abandoned.

“The legislature, executive and judiciary should work in mutual understanding and independently to maximise the sovereignty of the people. It is normal for the independence of these institutions and structures to be hampered under a government with majority power and there is no change in this government.” Premadasa said that the criterion for testing the sincerity of the government in safeguarding the sovereignty of the people is the facilitation made and progressive reforms introduced to maximize their effectiveness.

The Opposition Leader said that the government should clarify the date on which the government intends to hold the provincial council elections, the government’s position on further delaying the provincial council elections by restricting them to delimitation, as well as the government’s position on holding them under the old proportional system. He said that since the current government’s policy statement states that the public’s trust in the judicial system that has been broken will be rebuilt, it is stated that the provincial government will establish the Chief Prosecutor’s Office for that purpose, and requested the government to present the date on which that promise will be fulfilled.

Premadasa further asked for the government’s assessment on this matter as a public discourse has begun regarding the transfer, suspension and promotion of certain judges involved in cases that have attracted the most public attention.

“A prompt explanation is required from the government on a number of such important issues and that it is unthinkable to request a delay for this and that these are even mentioned in the election manifesto, so prompt answers should be provided,”the Opposition
Leader said.