Yamaha and AMW expect import ban on motorcycles will be lifted with economy stabilizing

Associated Motorways (Private) Limited (AMW), the official distributor for Yamaha Motorcycles, Service and Parts recently hosted a Dealer Meeting in Colombo. The key personnel gathered at the event included Andre Bonthyus, the newly appointed Group Managing Director of AMW.

Addressing the audience which comprised more than 200 Island-wide Yamaha dealers, Bonthyus said that he looks forward to growing the organization and emphasized on AMW’s return to the market.

Meanwhile, Kumika Imai, Executive General Manager – Yamaha Motor Corporation Japan, who is handling over 140 countries where Yamaha is present, stated that she had chosen to visit Sri Lanka due to the significance and value placed on the country and its market.

Notably, they mentioned the fact that automotive imports to Sri Lanka which have come to a halt due to the foreign exchange crisis, would get a respite this year, as the country’s macroeconomic indicators are getting into a better shape after four years.

“We believe that motorcycle imports will be allowed into Sri Lanka this year and we want our dealers to be ready to maintain and handle our loyal Yamaha customers, and meet the demand for Yamaha motorcycles,” they said.

“In such circumstances, Yamaha dealers should improve their business processes now, in order to thrive in the boom time.  We will be providing the dealer network with strategic guidance and support enabling them to align their business objectives with the overall vision of Yamaha and AMW,” they said.

They emphasized that Yamaha and AMW have developed new strategies to maintain close communication with all of their dealers.

“We will effectively communicate with our dealers and obtain their valuable inputs for strategic pricing of Yamaha motorcycles, spare parts and outboard motors. In addition to that, we will support our dealers in digital order placements, invoice posting, streamlining payment terms and business development through training sessions at regular intervals,” they said.

The import ban on vehicles in Sri Lanka has been in place since 2020; a decision made by the government to prevent the outflow of much needed foreign currency. A high percentage of the Sri Lankan workforce that actively contributes to the economy mainly depends on motorcycles for transportation because motorcycles can be bought and maintained at reasonable prices.

Sampath Bank achieves stable results amidst economic headwinds, while supporting the sustainability of its customers.

Yamaha and AMW expect import ban on motorcycles will be lifted with economy stabilising

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.