Presidential poll expected after 17 July - G.L

Says Presidential election must take place this year and cannot be deferred for any reason

Claims constitutional and legislative constraints will not allow alterations or postponements

Dispels any doubts public may have on holding of Presidential polls this year

Freedom People’s Congress (FPC) member Prof. G.L Peiris highlighted yesterday that the Election Commission of Sri Lanka (ECSL) must officially announce the Presidential election after 17 July.  “Following that, the ECSL can accept nominations within a window of 16 to 21 days,” he said during a press conference in Colombo.

Peiris emphasised that the Presidential election must take place this year and cannot be deferred for any reason. According to Peiris, the upcoming Presidential election therefore must be held between 17 September and 17 October.

“It is non-negotiable; neither the President nor the President’s Secretariat can alter or postpone it,” he emphasised, noting that the election cannot be delayed as the local Government elections were due to constitutional and legislative constraints.

Peiris remarked that the current Government’s history of employing various tactics to avoid elections is evident, particularly in light of the Secretary of the Ministry of Finance’s statement to the Supreme Court. He found it remarkable that the Secretary expressed difficulty in securing funds for elections in a democratic nation.

The MP assured the public that there should be no doubts regarding the holding of the Presidential election, emphasising that it will indeed take place before 17 October.

He highlighted that recent amendments to election laws by the government have raised reasonable doubts among the public regarding potential delays in parliamentary elections. However, he stressed that forthcoming parliamentary elections should adhere to the existing system rather than the proposed one. Peiris emphasised that this is due to the complexity of the delimitation process.