US working with Sri Lanka on Arugam Bay tourist security threat: Ambassador Chung

ECONOMYNEXT – The United States embassy is collaborating with the Sri Lanka government to respond to a security threat that resulted in its recent security alert to Americans to avoid Arugam Bay, Ambassador Julie Chung said.

“We will continue working together to support the safety and prosperity of Sri Lankan citizens and visitors alike,” Ambassador Chung told reporters Monday.

“When we became aware of a specific threat in the Arugam bay area, we shared these known details with Sri Lankan authorities, who responded quickly.

“We continue to actively coordinate with them on a daily basis. And we value our partnership with Sri Lanka’s leadership and security officials, whose commitment to safety and transparency is notable.”

“We know that continuous safety and stability are essential for a thriving tourism sector which we support absolutely.”

“So we are fully committed to supporting Sri Lanka’s efforts to create that secure welcoming environment for all.”

“One of my duties as the US ambassador is to ensure the safety and security of American citizens here in Sri Lanka. All around the world, our US embassies operate on what’s called a duty to warn.

“If we become aware of a credible, specific, security threat, we are required to share that information with our staff, US citizens and the host government.

A no-double standard policy also means that anytime the embassy alerts staff about a specific security concern, it is required to inform US citizens as well, Aambassador Chung said.

The ambassador said that there was no travel ban on Sri Lanka. “Our security alert last week was for Americans to avoid Arugam Bay until further notice.

“But our overall travel advisory for Sri Lanka remains exactly the same, at Level 2, which has been so for many years.

This is similar to advisories to many other popular destinations including the Maldives, France and Italy, she said.

Last week, the United States embassy asked nationals to avoid Arugam Bay in Sri Lanka’s Eastern Coast, a popular tourist destination, saying there is credible information of an attack.

US warns citizens off Sri Lanka’s Arugam Bay citing possible attack

EXPLAINER – US warning over attack on Sri Lanka’s Eastern tourism hotspot