HNB and UNIMO forge strategic partnership to revolutionize vehicle financing

Sri Lanka’s leading private sector bank, HNB PLC, recently announced their partnership with UNIMO, the automotive arm of United Motors, to provide affordable financing options and exclusive perks for customers looking to purchase vehicles.

The partnership offers customers looking to invest in automobiles with exclusive interest rates anchored to numerous benefits from both organisations. HNB Head of Retail Banking, Kanchana Karunagama, and UNIMO General Manager Shalain De Silva were present at a special ceremony held to sign the agreement.

Commenting on the partnership, HNB Head of Retail Banking, Kanchana Karunagama said: “At HNB, we are committed to empowering our customers with innovative and affordable financing solutions. Our partnership with UNIMO further strengthens our ability to provide our mutual customers with unmatched benefits and incentives when purchasing vehicles. We hope many will make use of this unique opportunity to invest in a vehicle. “

Under this partnership, HNB will offer a range of attractive financing options to meet the diverse need of its extensive customer base. The bank will provide the prevailing interest rate for structured leases and leases with residuals up to 5 years, without any additional interest charges.

Customers will also have access to exclusive card offers and special discounts on automobile products, servicing, spare parts, tyres, batteries and more through the Prestige Prime credit card provided to customers making use of the promotion. Furthermore, HNB General Insurance offers a free life insurance cover valued at Rs.4.5 million and a natural death insurance cover of Rs. 600,000.

With 254 customer centres, HNB is one of Sri Lanka’s largest, most technologically innovative private banks. Consolidating its legacy in sustainability, good governance, and corporate excellence, HNB was crowned the Best Corporate Citizen for 2022 at the Ceylon Chamber of Commerce Best Corporate Citizen Awards. Other significant accolades include being adjudged the “Best Automobile Financing Bank in the Asia-Pacific Region,” and “Best Retail Bank in Sri Lanka” for the 14th occasion by the Asian Banker, being declared the “Best SME Bank” by Asiamoney Magazine, as well as securing a Top 5 position on Business Today’s Top 40 rankings for 2023.

HNB was ranked among Sri Lanka’s Top 10 Most Admired companies in 2022 by the American Institute of Certified Public Accountants, Chartered Institute of Management Accountants, and the International Chamber of Commerce Sri Lanka. HNB was also recognized for its service excellence in trade services at the Euromoney Awards, taking home the prestigious titles of Best Market Leader in Trade Finance Services and Best Services Provider in Trade Finance Services, both globally and domestically.

Siyapatha Finance kicks off islandwide environmental cleaning project at 37 locations in one day

Women in Tech hosts ‘Rocket your career in STEM’ workshop with global HR expert Taz Rajabali

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.