Ceylon Chamber welcomes UK’s DCTS, says exporters need use opportunity

ECONOMYNEXT – Sri Lanka’s private sector trade body welcomed the UK’s liberalisation of rules of origin under its Developing Countries Trading Scheme (DCTS), saying it will provide a timely boost for the apparel industry — the island nation’s largest export sector.

The Ceylon Chamber encouraged local exporters to familiarise themselves with the new trade arrangements and “take full advantage of the opportunities available”.

To support this transition, the Chamber will collaborate with the UK High Commission and the Sri Lanka government to build awareness across the private sector, it said.

The Ceylon Chamber of Commerce welcomes the UK Government’s liberalisation of rules of origin under its Developing Countries Trading Scheme (DCTS), set to take effect in early 2026.

This important step reflects the UK’s continued commitment to greater trade openness and flexibility, offering Sri Lankan exporters enhanced access to one of their key markets.

The reforms, which allow Sri Lankan apparel manufacturers to source up to 100% of inputs from any country while retaining tariff-free access to the UK, will provide a timely boost for the apparel industry—Sri Lanka’s largest export sector.

In addition, the expanded regional cumulation arrangements across 18 Asian countries will further strengthen supply chains and open up opportunities for other value-added exports.

Mr. Krishan Balendra, Chairperson of The Ceylon Chamber of Commerce, stated: “We deeply appreciate the efforts of the UK Government, the British High Commission in Sri Lanka, the Sri Lankan Government, and the Joint Apparel Association Forum in advancing this initiative.

“The liberalised rules of origin will provide a strong impetus to Sri Lanka’s apparel industry and help strengthen our position as a trusted and competitive partner in global supply chains.”

The Ceylon Chamber encourages Sri Lankan exporters to familiarise themselves with the new trade arrangements and prepare to take full advantage of the opportunities available.

To support this transition, the Ceylon Chamber will collaborate closely with the UK High Commission and the Government of Sri Lanka to disseminate information and build broad-based awareness across the private sector. (Colombo/Aug20/2025)