Reward cops, probe Excise officers

The Police Department has its fair share of rogue elements who have brought the law enforcement authorities into disrepute and make them get bad press. But the police are not short of personnel who even go above and beyond the call of duty to nab lawbreakers and ensure public safety. Sadly, their good work often goes unappreciated.

Unit 2 of the Western Range (North) has done the police proud. On 28 June, its men and officers raided a house in Malabe, where illicit liquor was bottled, and arrested six suspects with as many as 18,000 bottles of illicit liquor.

The bottles of counterfeit arrack complete with security stickers and ready for distribution were virtually indistinguishable from the genuine products, according to investigators. Nobody knows how many bottles of counterfeit arrack had been produced there and how injurious the illicit brew is to health.

Under interrogation, the suspects revealed that the illicit brew had been distributed in the Eastern Province. On Thursday, the police team that conducted the Malabe raid rushed to Batticaloa, where they seized a large number of bottles of illicit liquor transported from Malabe. The police officers who took part in the raid deserve praise.

While the police were busy packing the bottles of illicit brew taken into custody and doing necessary paperwork, a group of Excise officers materialised, and claimed that the police had made a documentation error. Their intervention led to a recount of the bottles of counterfeit liquor in custody, but the allegation turned out to be baseless. Obviously, the Excise Department personnel did not take kindly to the police raid.

One of the police officers told the Excise officers some home truths, one being that the police were doing what the Excise Department should have done. One cannot but agree with him.

The police had to move in as the Excise officers had failed to carry out their duties and functions. The latter should have been able to trace the untested brew transported and sold illegally in liquor outlets in the East. It is possible that the Malabe brew, as it were, was distributed in other parts of the country as well.

Illicit liquor has claimed many lives in this country during the past several years and therefore the brew, seized in Malabe and in some parts of the Eastern Province, must be tested urgently to see if it contains harmful substances. One may recall that in January 2026, six people died in Wennappuwa after consuming arrack purchased from a licensed liquor outlet. Such tragedies occur due to contamination, counterfeit infiltration and supply-chain frauds.

As for the police raids in Malabe and the East, there is reason to believe that so many bottles of illicit liquor could not have been distributed and sold in licensed outlets, unbeknownst to the Excise Department personnel, who are paid with public funds to keep a watchful eye on liquor retailers, among others, and act on any transgressions. That the police had to do their job is an indictment of the Excise officers, especially those under whose nose the illicit brew was sold in the East.

A member of the police team which conducted the raid in the East has asked how the security stickers meant for the legally produced bottles of liquor got into the wrong hands. A thorough investigation should be conducted to ascertain whether Excise officers were involved in the liquor racket and why they confronted the police in the East instead of cooperating.

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.