Hayleys Solar introduces solar hot water systems

Hayleys Solar, the pioneering force in Sri Lanka’s solar energy landscape, has unveiled Solar Powered Water Heaters to the local market.

Commenting on the launch, Hayleys Fentons Managing Director Hasith Prematillake states, “We aim to make renewable energy solutions accessible but also rewarding for every Sri Lankan household. With this product offering, we will continue to develop the hot water systems market by offering energy-efficient solutions that leverage the power of the sun.”

The Solar Powered Water Heaters, available in both Pressure and Non-Pressure variants, are a step towards eco-conscious living. These systems come in various tank capacities—100L, 150L, 200L, and 300L—tailored to suit diverse household needs. Crafted with a durable stainless-steel tank and equipped with higher efficiency vacuum tubes that can consecutively retain heat for up to three days.

Hot water systems, while affordable upfront, can increase monthly electricity bills. However, for a four-person household, the cost savings from reduced hot water usage can help ease the pressures of increased electricity cost with a payback period of two years. The system offers a 10-year warranty, providing peace of mind for long-term use.

Hayleys Solar Executive Director and CEO Roshane Perera emphasised the benefits of the solar powered water heater, stating, “We have solar powered water heater systems that are ideal for commercial, industrial and household appliances and we understand that each hot water system requirement is unique. Specifically, the pressure type solar hot water system is compatible with any location, irrespective of the water pressure required.

“Customer service and speed of installation is paramount. With island-wide sales and technical support, customers can seamlessly access this system along with the expertise needed for installation and maintenance.”

For more information about the Solar Powered Water Heaters and to benefit from the introductory offer, contact Hayleys Solar’s island-wide sales and technical support team via 011 2 102 102.