An exclusive webinar to explain the research methodology behind SLIM-KANTAR People’s Awards 2024

Sri Lanka Institute of Marketing proudly announces the upcoming SLIM-KANTAR People’s Awards – 2024, a highly anticipated event renowned in the Sri Lankan corporate landscape and masses. Kantar, a global leader in marketing research, has played a crucial role as the esteemed research partner for the SLIM-KANTAR People’s Awards since 2022. These awards, hosted by SLIM, signify a transformational approach to positioning the SLIM KANTAR People’s Awards, fostering top-of-mind awareness of brands and personalities close to the hearts of Sri Lankans.

As the initial step of this year’s event, an informative ONLINE WEBINAR titled “Know What” has been scheduled for February 26, 2024. The Research Methodology will be presented by Kantar Director Mrs Himalee Madurasinghe, along with SLIM Vice President Gayan Perera and Project Chairman Manthika Ranasinghe. The primary purpose of this webinar is to explain the scientific intricacies of research methodology and its standards. Unlike traditional award selection methods, which often rely on expert jury panels or voting, the SLIM KANTAR People’s Awards are based on an extensive islandwide survey conducted by Kantar on behalf of SLIM.

Each participant will gain valuable insights into the meticulous process that distinguishes the SLIM KANTAR People’s Awards, offering a comprehensive understanding of their profound impact on the industry and the detailed research methodology behind them.

Chinthaka Perera, the President of SLIM, is strategically guiding the SLIM Kantar People’s Awards 2024 project. He mentioned, “This year, new award categories, such as the most popular YouTube channel and the most popular musical band, have been added to keep this prestigious awards program up-to-date”.

Also, the project is being directed by the council members and the SLIM Executive Committee.

To register for the online webinar or inquire further about the event, participants can reach Gangani via WhatsApp at +94 70 326 6988 or email at gangani.l@slim.lk.

Seylan Bank records a strong performance, despite a challenging environment

CSE partners with SLIM to promote capital market education among students

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.