SLGJA announces 2025 FACETS exhibition

The Sri Lanka Gem and Jewellery Association (SLGJA) has announced the 31st edition of FACETS Sri Lanka, South Asia’s premier gem and jewellery exhibition which will take place from 4th to 6th January 2025 at the Cinnamon Grand Colombo.

This prestigious exhibition is a global meeting point for the gem and jewellery industry, attracting renowned traders, wholesalers, exporters, manufacturers, lapidarists, retailers, and collectors from around the world.

FACETS has long been a celebration of Sri Lanka’s illustrious heritage in gems and jewellery. The island nation is recognized as a global leader in gemstone production, known for its extraordinary variety of precious stones. With a rich history as the world’s oldest source of colored gemstones, Sri Lanka offers a vibrant selection of gems highly sought after internationally. Complementing this treasure trove is the island’s exceptional craftsmanship, which blends contemporary trends with deep cultural influences to create timeless beauty.

FACETS Sri Lanka 2025 promises an exciting lineup of events, including Sapphire Night – an exclusive affair celebrating the allure of sapphires through glamour and networking, and a Story Corner – where attendees can delve into the industry’s practices and rich history. The exhibition will also feature a Power Breakfast, designed to inspire and connect women in the gem and jewellery sector, a Mine Tour, offering firsthand insight into gem mining and knowledge exchange with industry experts, and a visit to Port City, Colombo’s premier investment and emerging economic hub. Additional events also include a VIP Golf Tournament, creating exclusive experiences for high-profile attendees.

Sri Lankan ‘legal trailblazer’ in Japan making efforts to attract Japanese investors to Sri Lanka

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.