Tri-forces personnel deployed to hospitals amidst health strike

In response to the island-wide strike by trade unions in the health sector, tri-force personnel have been deployed to the state hospitals across the country today (Feb.01) the ongoing health strike, depending on the requirements at each facility.

Defence Ministry said the decision was taken to make sure that daily hospital functions are not disrupted by the ongoing strike launched by health sector workers over allowances.

Sri Lanka Army said its troops were dispatched to the National Hospital of Sri Lanka (NHSL), National Eye Hospital, Dental Hospital Colombo, Homagama Base Hospital, Kalubowila Teaching Hospital, Mirigama Base Hospital, District General Hospital Avissawella, Kurunegala Teaching Hospital and a number of other state health facilities for uninterrupted provision of essential medical services to the public.

“Army personnel have been stationed at various hospitals under the vigilant supervision of the respective Security Forces Commanders. This proactive measure aims to provide crucial support and maintain the seamless operation of healthcare services. Troops also remain on standby to deploy swiftly in case of emergencies,” the Army said in a statement.

Health services have been crippled at hospitals after 72 health sector trade unions launched an island-wide strike at 6.30 a.m. today to urge the government to address the issues concerning allowances without delay.

It is understood that the doctors’ unions and the All Ceylon Nurses’ Union have not joined the strike action. However, they have vowed to resort to a trade union action if no response is received to their suggestions and demands.

On January 08, the Cabinet of Ministers approved President Ranil Wickremesinghe’s proposal to double the DAT allowance paid to government doctors, raising it from Rs. 35,000 to Rs. 70,000.

Since then, the health sector employees’ trade unions representing a wide range of health sector professionals, including radiology and laboratory technicians, pharmacists and drug compounders, midwives, dental surgeons, public health inspectors, and entomology officers launched strikes on multiple occasions in protest of the government’s decision and demanding an allowance increase for all health sector employees.