Home Lands to unveil ‘Central Park Boulevard Port City Colombo’ with  largest-ever real estate launch in Sri Lanka

From left: Deputy Director Sales and Marketing Mario Offen, Head of Business Development and Marketing Ashinsanie Weerasinghe, Chairman and Managing Director Nalin Herath, Executive Director Amaya Herath, Deputy Director Marketing Rishad Mansoor and Director Operations and Administration Lanka Jayasinghe

Bollywood stars and distinguished guests to celebrate unveiling of Central Park Boulevard Port City Colombo

Home Lands is set to make history with Sri Lanka’s largest-ever real estate launch, unveiling Central Park Boulevard Port City Colombo, The Indian Ocean’s Next Wonder. The launch, titled “The Grand Launch Weekend,” will comprise a series of events taking place from tomorrow to 14 June 2026 at the Lumina Ballroom, Cinnamon Life at City of Dreams.

The Grand Launch Weekend will commence with “The Night of Emeralds” tomorrow (12 June), marking the official launch of Central Park Boulevard Port City Colombo. The glamorous opening night is expected to bring together an exclusive gathering of distinguished business leaders, celebrities, social influencers, and prominent personalities from Sri Lanka and overseas, alongside celebrated Bollywood stars.

The weekend will continue with a carefully curated series of elevated experiences, including The Boulevard Brunch, The Boulevard High Tea, and The Boulevard Sundowner on Saturday, 13 June, followed by The Boulevard Evening on Sunday, 14 June. These exclusive experiences will provide visitors with the opportunity to explore the project in greater detail and engage with the Home Lands team in a sophisticated and immersive setting. Reflecting the scale, prestige, and significance of the development, the launch has been designed as more than an unveiling, but a landmark occasion befitting the most ambitious and anticipated real estate development in Sri Lanka.

This is the first time in Sri Lanka, a high-rise development project is inspired by an ultra-luxury international lifestyle brand, introducing a new benchmark in luxury living. Central Park Boulevard Port City Colombo features world-class amenities and premium value additions. Located in the Central Park District, this twin-tower development rises 37 levels and is poised to become one of Port City Colombo’s most iconic landmarks. Overlooking and seamlessly merging with nearly 40 acres of lush green parkland and a scenic waterway, while offering uninterrupted views of the Indian Ocean and spectacular sunsets, its sleek architecture blends seamlessly with the curated landscape of the Central Park, creating a tranquil oasis within a futuristic city. Central Park Boulevard Port City Colombo presents an exceptional collection of over 640 units, thoughtfully designed to suit a diverse range of modern lifestyles.

Beyond its lifestyle appeal, Central Park Boulevard offers exceptional investment potential. This iconic twin-tower development is expected to attract large inflows of foreign currency into the country, with the total project value estimated at over $ 300 million. The project investment of $ 150 million, by Home Lands, marks the largest real estate investment by a single Sri Lankan developer. Reflecting the strong confidence investors have already placed in the project, an exceptional 50% of units have already been sold ahead of the official launch, underscoring robust market demand and the development’s compelling investment proposition.

Ahead of the Grand Launch Weekend, Home Lands has appointed world-renowned cricket legend Mahela Jayawardene as Brand Ambassador, reflecting a shared legacy of trust, excellence, and international recognition.

Following the launch weekend, Home Lands will officially open the Central Park Boulevard Port City Colombo Sales Gallery on Monday, 15th June 2026.  The Sales Gallery will provide an immersive introduction to the development’s vision, design, investment potential, and lifestyle offering, allowing visitors to experience firsthand the future of luxury living at Port City Colombo.