Couple QR-based quota with odd-even rationing

Long lines of vehicles are still seen outside filling stations despite the introduction of the QR-based fuel quota system. They show no signs of going away any time soon. Teething problems associated with the QR-controlled fuel rationing have persisted longer than usual for three reasons—some system flaws, difficulties faced by filling station workers in scanning some QR codes, especially the old ones issued in 2022, and a supply shortfall that has made many pumps run dry. The JVP-NPP government came to power promising a digital economy, among other things, and unveiled an ambitious digital policy in the run-up to the 2024 presidential election. But it has not been able to ensure the smooth reimplementation of the QR-based fuel quota system, which was successfully used in 2022 to resolve a fuel crisis. So much for the government’s digital capability.

Some fillings stations have remained closed during the past several days for want of supplies, causing long queues near the ones where fuel is available albeit in insufficient quantities. The government must find out why these filling stations have not received fuel or whether they are hiding stocks. Its leaders know how the distribution of Ceylon Petroleum Corporation (CPC) fuel stocks was delayed in 2022 as part of a strategy to unsettle the then government. Complaints abound that many foreign-run filling stations do not receive supplies regularly. This is something the government must look into. It is not difficult to imagine how bad the situation would have been if all CPC-owned filling stations had been privatised.

The current fuel shortage is different from what we experienced in 2022, as we argued in a previous comment in response to some false claims made by the Opposition. Today, the country has dollars for oil imports, but the Iran conflict has disrupted global oil supplies, unlike in 2022, when it had no forex to pay for oil, which was readily available in the world market. So, the Opposition should stop comparing apples and oranges, and trying to gain political mileage out of the current fuel crisis.

However, the SLPP-UNP government managed to bring fuel queues to an end by introducing the QR-controlled fuel sales though it had neither dollars nor sufficient petroleum reserves at the time; the country was running on fumes, so to speak. Today, the government says the existing fuel reserves are sufficient for more than one month, and oil shipments are arriving on schedule, but it cannot manage the fuel stocks to ensure a reliable petroleum supply with the help of the QR-based rationing. It also claims that there are sufficient LPG stocks, but it has pathetically failed to resolve the countrywide LPG shortage. It may be recalled that the SLPP-UNP government sorted out a LPG shortage as well in 2022. It managed to do so despite the country’s forex woes and severely depleted gas stocks. The JVP-NPP government has no such problems. Sri Lanka’s Gross Official Reserves amounted to USD 6.0 bn (including a swap facility) at the time of the 2024 regime change. The current government has substantial reserves of foreign currency and fuel, but it cannot do away with the fuel queues, which are reportedly getting longer. Is it that the SLPP-UNP administration, which the JVP/NPP condemned as a failed regime, was more efficient and competent than the incumbent government in meeting the energy needs of the public amidst a crisis?

The biggest problem with the JVP-NPP government is that its leaders try to talk problems away instead of knuckling down to them. They let the grass grow under their feet, and when they begin to act, it is late. The manner in which they have sought to address the current fuel crisis is a case in point. They are in overdrive, doing what they should have done at least two weeks ago. They also had ample time to do a dry run of the QR-based fuel rationing system to prevent technical issues. They have endless meetings and nothing seems to come of them if the persistence of the problems they are intended to address is any indication.

As for long queues of vehicles near filling stations, the solution, in our view, is to replenish stocks expeditiously and couple the QR-based fuel quota system with last-digit or odd-even rationing.

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.