Government should accept responsibility: Opposition

Colombo, July 7 (Daily Mirror) - President Anura Kumara Dissanayake, the subject minister and the government as a whole should accept the responsibility for the clash at Negombo Prison, which has left 26 people dead, the opposition said yesterday.

Opposition Leader Sajith Premadasa, who made a statement on the clash, said the government should accept the responsibility. He said the government had proved its inability to handle a crisis situation.

“Some prisoners have died while scores have been injured in the clash at the Negombo Prison during the last two days. This is ample proof that the government cannot handle a crisis and is a complete failure,” Mr Premadasa said.

“A proper investigation should be conducted on the incident by a committee in Parliament. This committee cannot be one which comprises a majority of ruling party members, which prepares reports according to the whims and fancies of the government. It should comprise opposition members as well,” he added.

MP Dayasiri Jayasekara, who also said the government should be held responsible, highlighted that the clash is a result of an administration breakdown in prisons. “The absence of able officers in prison resulted in the clash, which was uncontrollable. Able officers such as former Commissioner General of Prisons Thushara Upuldeniya are needed to maintain order in prisons,” the MP said.

Also, he questioned whether the subject minister or the authorities attached to the prisons department had visited the Negombo Prison to inquire about the issues with regard to the Negombo Prison.

Sri Lanka Podujana Peramuna (SLPP) MP Sanjeewa Edirimanne, who referred to the incident at a media briefing, said President Anura Kumara Dissanayake should walk the talk. He said so by recalling a remark made by President Dissanayake on a prison clash which took place in Mahara Prison in 2020 when he was an opposition MP in 2020. “President Dissanayake said at that time that it is the government which is responsible for the lives of the prisoners if they die under tragic circumstances.”

CID launches probe into Negombo Prison unrest; Key inmate transferred to Boossa

No casualties among foreign inmates in Negombo prison clash: Authorities