Sri Lanka, India move to finalise MoU for Kankesanthurai Port development

Colombo, Sep. 3 (Daily Mirror) - Sri Lanka and India have taken steps to expedite the finalisation of a Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) for the development of the Kankesanthurai Port with Indian Government support.

A special discussion on the MoU was held this morning at the Ministry of Energy, Ports and Civil Aviation under the leadership of Minister Anura Karunathilaka.

A delegation representing the Indian Government, including Deputy High Commissioner of India Maitrey Kulkarni, participated in the discussions.

Deputy Minister Janitha Ruwan Kodituwakku, Ministry Secretary W.W.S. Mangala, the Chairman of the Sri Lanka Ports Authority and senior officials also attended the meeting. Officials from the Ministry of Foreign Affairs were also present.

During the discussion, both sides focused on several outstanding matters in the proposed MoU. The issues were discussed extensively, with the two parties reaching agreements on the matters under consideration.

The proposed Kankesanthurai Port development project is expected to facilitate passenger and cargo transportation between Sri Lanka and India while strengthening maritime connectivity between the two countries.

The establishment of a Joint Monitoring Committee and a Technical Committee to oversee and monitor the implementation of the project was also proposed.

The Indian delegation agreed to submit the outcome and progress of the discussions to the Indian Government at the earliest and indicated that a final decision would be communicated soon.

The project is expected to strengthen maritime relations between India and Northern Sri Lanka, improve port infrastructure in the Northern Province and contribute to increased regional economic activity. It is also expected to create greater opportunities for communities in the Northern region, including the Tamil population, to benefit from improved connectivity and economic opportunities.

In February 2026, Minister Karunathilaka inspected the current condition of the Kankesanthurai Port and instructed relevant Ministry officials and the management of the Sri Lanka Ports Authority to take necessary steps to expedite the project.

At the time, the Minister said arrangements were being made to finalise and sign the relevant MoUs in the near future.