Sri Lanka President meets IMF delegation, stresses for “balanced approach”

ECONOMYNEXT – Sri Lanka President Anura Kumara Dissanayake met International Monetary Fund (IMF) delegation members who are in Colombo for the third review of the global lender’s $3 billion bailout package.

The island nation’s economy has stabilized since it declared sovereign debt default in 2022, but is still facing uncertainty due to local vulnerabilities and debt restructuring.

The IMF delegation is in Colombo to complete the third review of the loan programme before approving the disbursement of the fourth tranche of the loan.

“Met with the IMF delegation today (18) to discuss Sri Lanka’s economic recovery,” Dissanayake said in his X platform.

“I stressed the need for a balanced approach that addresses citizen hardships and restores public trust.”

“Our focus: tackling child poverty, and malnutrition, supporting the differently abled, and fighting corruption with stringent reforms.”

In a separate statement, the President’s Media Division (PMD) said Dissanayake assured that under his leadership, social spending allocations would be utilized effectively, with priority given to combating child poverty and malnutrition and providing better support for differently abled individuals.

“The IMF delegation noted that allocations for social spending had not been fully utilized previously, prompting President Dissanayake to pledge proactive measures to ensure efficient allocation and utilization of resources,” the PMD said.

“Governance and anti-corruption were also central to the discussions. The President reiterated his administration’s commitment to the fight against corruption, a key component of the mandate granted by the people. He assured the IMF team that his government would implement stringent laws to enhance the legislative and institutional structures to uphold transparency and accountability.”

“The meeting marked a positive step forward in the collaboration between the government and the IMF, laying the groundwork for a coordinated effort toward economic recovery and long-term stability.”

Dissanayake’s ruling National People’s Power (NPP) in the past has said it wants to renegotiate the IMF loan to reduce taxes and increase concessions.

However, government officials who are aware of the IMF deals said the government will have very little space to maneuver with the economy.

“If you change even one simple policy, we might face the risk of going back to the 2022 economic crisis soon,” an official who has been with the IMF meetings in the past, told EconomyNext. (Colombo/November 18/2024)