Tea auction sees firm demand for 5.1mn kg offering

The auction offerings totalled 5.1 million kilogrammes (M/Kgs), of which 0.4 M/Kgs comprised of reprints.

A good general demand was seen all round, perhaps against the backdrop of limited availability.

The Ex-Estate offerings were fairly similar to last and totalled 0.7 M/Kgs. A selection of teas showed an improvement, particularly from the Western slopes.

Improved widespread demand was seen for the better teas, which were firm and dearer, following quality, whilst the others sold around last week’s levels.

The Nuwara Eliya BOP/BOPFs together with the BOPs at the lower end of the market continued to be a disappointing feature. Consequently, particularly in the Plainer category, the price parity between BOP/BOPFs ranged up to Rs.200 per kilogramme in favour of the latter.

The High and Mid Grown CTC teas witnessed improved activity and a firm to dearer trend in prices, particularly for the teas in the middle price bracket. The corresponding Low Grown types continued to sell well.

A selective demand was seen from the shippers to the UK and continent. Fair activity was seen from Japan and China, whilst the shippers to the CIS and Middle East showed improved activity.

The Low Growns totalled approximately 2.4 M/Kgs. All categories met with fair demand.

In the Leafy and Semi-Leafy catalogues, the well-made BOP1s together with the teas at the bottom were firm, whilst the balance declined. The OP1s, in general, were firm to dearer. The well-made OP/OPAs were easier, whilst the balance was firm to selectively dearer. The Select Best and Best PEK/PEK1s were irregular, whilst the Below Best and mixed varieties were easier. The teas at the bottom were firm.

In the Tippy catalogue, a selection of high-priced FBOPs were firm, whilst the balance together with the Best and Below Best were easier.  The teas at the bottom sold at last levels. A few Select Best FF1s were firm, whilst the balance together with the Best was irregular. The Below Best and teas at the lower end were lower.

In the Premium catalogue, the Tippy teas in general appreciated.