Lanka Hospitals inaugurates new Bariatric Centre, surpasses 250th surgery milestone

Lanka Hospitals is delighted to announce the successful inauguration of its new Bariatric Centre, coinciding with the celebration of surpassing the milestone of 250 successful Bariatric surgeries performed at the hospital. The inauguration ceremony, held on April 06th, was attended by distinguished guests, medical professionals, and members of the media.

Deepthi Lokuarachchi, Group CEO of Lanka Hospitals said, “The successful inauguration of our new Bariatric Centre and the surpassing of our 250th successful surgery mark a momentous occasion for Lanka Hospitals. We remain committed to providing world-class healthcare services and improving the overall health and well-being of our patients.”

Dr. Lasantha Karunasekera, Deputy CEO & Director Medical Services at Lanka Hospitals, highlighted the importance of bariatric surgery in addressing obesity and related metabolic disorders. “Bariatric surgery is a life-changing procedure that can significantly improve the quality of life for patients struggling with obesity. Our new Bariatric Centre is equipped with state-of-the-art facilities and staffed by a team of highly experienced specialists, ensuring the best possible outcomes for our patients.”

Prof. Thejana Wijeratne, Heading the Lanka Hospitals Bariatric Centre said, “At Lanka Hospitals, our focus goes beyond average Bariatric surgeries. We have begun to meet more challenging Bariatric surgeries for patients experiencing other complex medical conditions, such as those being treated for acute kidney conditions. Our goal is to offer advanced care and treatments to improve the health and well-being of our patients.”

John Keells Properties hosts Union Bank customers at its ‘Viman’ Ja-Ela model apartment

Rose Cooray inducted to the Hall of Fame at Great Manager Awards 2024

Appeal Court grants interim order, halting government’s Lanka Hospitals Corporation PLC divestiture process until 12 March

Lanka Hospitals reaches the milestone of 1,500 IVF baby deliveries

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.