North Western Province extends Grade 6–11 second term exams due to delay in question papers

Colombo, July 14 (Daily Mirror) - The North Western Provincial Education Department has postponed part of the second term examinations for Grades 6 to 11 after delays in the printing and distribution of question papers and answer scripts.

In a circular addressed to Regional Directors, Provincial Director of Education J.A.M.P. Jayathilaka said the second term examinations for Grades 6 to 9 were originally scheduled to be held from July 9 to July 17, while examinations for Grades 10 and 11 were to continue until July 20.

According to the circular, the institution responsible for printing and distributing the examination papers was expected to deliver the question papers and answer scripts to divisional education offices by July 6. However, only the question papers required for the first four days of the examination were received irregularly, while the answer scripts had not been distributed.

The printing institution has informed the Provincial Department of Education in writing that it would not be able to print, package and distribute the question papers and answer scripts scheduled for July 15 to July 20 before Sunday, July 19.

As a result, provincial education authorities decided to extend the remaining examinations to be held from July 21 to July 24, following approval granted at a discussion held on July 13 with the Chief Secretary of the North Western Province.

Regional Directors have been instructed to immediately inform Divisional Directors, school principals and students of the revised arrangements. The Provincial Director said a revised examination timetable would be issued on July 14.

Schools have also been advised to use the four-day period by conducting activities such as discussing completed examination papers and holding revision sessions for subjects yet to be examined to ensure students' time is used productively.

The Provincial Director expressed regret for the inconvenience caused to students, teachers, principals, divisional directors and other education officials due to the disruption.