IoA honoured in Forbes Advisor’s Guide

The Institute of Analytics (IoA) announces that it has been featured in

Forbes Advisor’s illustrious guide on becoming a data analyst. As a revered professional body, the IoA has consistently championed the advancement of data analytics professionals by offering a wealth of learning resources, continuous professional development (CPD) opportunities and fostering a robust, global community network.

The IoA’s recognition by Forbes Advisor is a testament to its unwavering dedication to elevating the field of data analytics and nurturing professionals at every stage of their careers. This accolade not only underscores the IoA’s pivotal role in the industry but also highlights its relentless pursuit of excellence in supporting its members.

“We are honoured to be included within a feature on such a prestigious platform,” said Dr. Clare Walsh, Director of Education at IoA. “This recognition reaffirms our commitment to providing unparalleled support and resources to our members, enabling them to thrive in the dynamic field of data analytics.”

The Institute of Analytics (IoA) is a not-for-profit global body for analytics & data science professionals. Our mission is to develop and promote the highest professional and ethical standards, create awareness of the value of data analytics and its uses in society and inspire the next generation of analysts & data scientists through education.

We help our members stay ahead of the curve of digital transformation through access to benefits including training and upskilling, updates about advancements in technology and regulation, masterclasses and thought leadership.

How the University of Peradeniya has weathered the politico-economic storms of the decades

NSB records a PBT of Rs.15.0 billion for first six months of 2024

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.