Sri Lanka Insurance Corporation General Limited inaugurates business operations for 2026

Sri Lanka Insurance Life Ltd and Sri Lanka Insurance General Ltd inaugurated their business operations for the year 2026 on 1st January at the Sri Lanka Insurance Head Office. The event was graced by the Chairman, Board members, Corporate Management, and staff of SLIC.

Parallel business launches were also conducted at branch level, with branch staff joining the head office proceedings via live stream. The day’s programme commenced with blessings observed from the four major religious faiths, symbolising unity and goodwill for the year ahead

Heralding the dawn of the New Year, SLIC brought together all 142 branches in a cohesive celebration, uniting as one family to light the traditional oil lamp. During the celebrations, the theme for SLICGL for 2026 ‘Leading the market, strengthening every step’ was officially unveiled

Celebrating 64 years of service and expertise, SLIC continues to stand as Sri Lanka’s most respected and trusted name in insurance. Over the decades, the organisation has remained at the forefront of the sector, sustaining industry‑wide growth and equity even through testing times.

The year 2025 brought many meaningful and positive achievements for SLICGL, yet it concluded with significant challenges as the nation faced the aftermath of the devastating Cyclone Ditwah. Rising to the occasion, SLICGL honoured claims and delivered timely relief, offering protection and reassurance to communities impacted by the catastrophe.

SLICGL proudly reflects on a year of remarkable achievements in 2025. The organisation was ranked

Sri Lanka’s highest-rated insurance brand as the only A+ Fitch rated insurer in the country and became the first and only insurer to surpass Rs. 30 billion in Gross Written Premium. SLICGL secured Carbon Neutral Certification, highlighting a commitment to sustainability. SLICL was also recognised as the Most Valuable General Insurance Brand by Brand Finance.

The lifting of the vehicle import ban in January 2025 helped to revitalize the automotive sector and also reaffirmed SLICGL’s role as the nation’s most trusted insurer. Stepping in to protect new vehicle owners, SLICGL strengthened its portfolio, supported national growth, and supported families and businesses to move forward with confidence.

During 2025, SLICGL continued its partnership with the Ministry of Education on the Suraksha Insurance Scheme, a national initiative aimed at securing the health and wellbeing 4.5 million schoolchildren throughout the country. The partnership provides students regardless of background, access to essential insurance coverage, safeguarding health, supporting families, and strengthening the nation’s future.

SLIGL’s mission places customers at the heart of everything it does. The organisation continues in the commitment of meeting and exceeding customer expectations through its expertise and specialised services. Aligning business strategies with this vision, SLIC delivers a superior customer experience through all touchpoints.

MILCO turns around fortunes, posts Rs. 1.49 bn record profit in 2025

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.