Dengue could rise again with upcoming rains

Colombo, Sep. 15 (Daily Mirror) - Dengue breeding sites continue to be detected across the country through ongoing entomological surveys, Acting Director of the National Dengue Control Unit (NDCU) Dr. Kapila Kannangara said.

Speaking about the special dengue control programme launched yesterday (14) for a period of one week, Dr. Kannangara said the number of dengue cases had declined from the high-risk levels recorded recently.

He said the reduction had been achieved through the efforts of health authorities and the cooperation of the public.

However, Dr. Kannangara warned that dengue could resurface with the expected rains in the coming months. He said the special one-week programme had therefore been launched to prevent a resurgence of the disease.

The programme is being implemented in six provinces and 15 districts, along with the Colombo Municipal Council area.

Ten teams will be deployed to each Medical Officer of Health (MOH) area under the programme. Each team will comprise a health worker, a military personnel, a police officer and volunteers.

Dr. Kannangara said the special programme was launched yesterday in anticipation of rainfall expected during the coming months due to the northeast monsoon, El Niño conditions and the inter-monsoon period.

“Compared to the high-risk situation experienced recently, there has been a reduction in the number of dengue cases. At that time, between 1,200 and 1,300 cases were reported daily. At present, the overall daily figure is around 159 cases,” he said.

He said the programmes carried out previously, together with public support, had helped authorities bring the high-risk epidemic situation under control relatively quickly.

“However, we cannot be satisfied with this situation because our ongoing entomological surveys in every district have found that dengue breeding sites still exist,” Dr. Kannangara said.

He said the special one-week programme was being conducted to further control the situation and prevent dengue from gaining momentum again.

Mirror Missions: Can You Stop the Next Dengue Surge in Sri Lanka?