The Voice of Australia… no Sri Lankans!

Although we do have lots of Sri Lankans, living in Australia, we haven’t heard of a Sri Lankan artiste taking the honours at some of the major competitions Down Under, except for Andrew De Silva who won the Australia’s Got Talent competition, some years ago.

The winner of the 2024 The Voice of Australia hails from Goa and no sooner Reuben De Melo’s name was announced, Goans around the world were jubilant that one of their very own had won the prestigious singing contest in Australia, after the public voted during the grand finale on Sunday.

He won a cash prize of Australian $100,000, and an all-inclusive recording package.

Reuben (31), now based in Perth, Western Australia, says that with a recording development package now in his hands, his top priority is to pursue a full-time career in the music industry “rather than having to always worry about finances.”

The father of three went on to say that the prize money is probably going to help them out with a lot of repayments, like their mortgage, and a bit of work around the house as well.

While his standout vocal performances on the series may have blown audiences away, Reuben also credits his connection with all-star coach LeAnn Rimes as a factor in his success on the show.

“Even though she’s an absolute star in this industry, she’s come down to my level and just really guided me through and empathised with me the whole time. She went above and beyond to get me over the line, and I owe a lot of stuff to her.”

Reuben De Melo performed the song ‘House Of The Rising Sun’ at the finals.

His next step, he says will be to release music with others, collaborate with other artistes, and just release music.

Partnership between govt. and other parties necessary to resolve national issues

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.