New education reforms to focus on inclusive education: Deputy Minister

Colombo, Sep. 8 (Daily Mirror) - The new education reforms will place greater emphasis on inclusive education to ensure that no child is left behind and that all students receive equal educational opportunities, Deputy Minister of Education and Higher Education Dr. Madura Seneviratne said.

He made the remarks while participating in the 2026 Milad-un-Nabi celebrations organised by the Muslim School Development Branch of the Ministry of Education, Higher Education and Vocational Education.

Dr. Seneviratne said the examples and teachings of Prophet Muhammad should be considered particularly important at a time when Sri Lanka's education sector is undergoing a major transformation.

He said the new reforms have given greater attention to inclusive education and other measures aimed at ensuring equal educational rights for all children.

Prime Minister and Minister of Education, Higher Education and Vocational Education Dr. Harini Amarasuriya, who also attended the event, said education has an important role to play in promoting equality and mutual respect.

She said the Government's education reforms aim to introduce changes not only to curricula but also to teaching and learning methods.

The Prime Minister said the objective is to develop students with the confidence and skills needed to make a positive contribution to society.

She also stressed the importance of schools providing opportunities for students from different communities to interact and learn about different cultures.

The Government believes that creating future citizens who can contribute to a society where people live together in harmony and dignity is a key objective of the education reform process, she said.

The event was attended by Ministry Secretary Nalaka Kaluwewa, Commissioner General of Examinations Indika Kumari Liyanage, Senior Lecturer in Arabic and Islamic Civilization at the University of Peradeniya Dr. S. M. Tamim, Major N. T. Nasumutdeen, ministry officials, principals, teachers and students.