PRISL holds strategic workshop on future of tyre and rubber products industry

The Plastics and Rubber Institute of Sri Lanka (PRISL) held a highly successful high level strategic workshop titled “Navigating the Future: Sustainability, Innovation and Compliance, in the Tyre and Rubber Products Industry” on 15 and 16 March at the BMICH, Colombo.

The chief resource person was the Indian Rubber Institute Chairman Dr. R. Mukhopadhyay while the local support was provided by Dr. Upul Ratnayaka and Devaki Rodrigo of Dipped Products Ltd., a leading latex glove manufacturer, and Colombo Rubber Traders Association (CRTA) Chairman Manoj Udugampola. The Inauguration ceremony, was graced by some senior officials from the Sri Lanka Export Development Board, and the Ministry of Industries as well Polymer Advisory Council  Chairman and PRISL Past President Kaushal Rajapaksa and  Sri Lanka Association of Manufacturers and Exporters of Rubber Products (SLAMERP) Chairman Pushpika Janadheera, and Director General Dr. Sisira Ranathunga.

During his welcome address PRISL President P.P. Perera who is the Sri Lanka Representative of Tyre Trends, stressed on the vital national need for keeping abreast of the emerging trends in the global polymer industry and the role played by the PRISL as the “trusted knowledge partner to the polymer industry in Sri Lanka.”

Collaboration and cooperation with the leading organisations such as the Indian Rubber Institute in organising workshops of this nature was also highlighted. “If we do not change with time, change will change us,” he added.

A wide scope of topics of contemporary interest was covered during the workshop including Future direction of the rubber industry; Sustainability and circular economy challenges, and opportunities in the robber industry; the role of specialty elastomers in green mobility; Challenges in process control and troubleshooting; and Emerging legislations and regulatory requirements in the rubber industry. A very enlightening panel discussion was conducted on the second day with the participation of DSI Group Chairman Emeritus Dr. Kulatunga Rajapaksa, SLAMERP Chairman Pushpika Janadheera, Global Rubber Industries CEO Dr. Mahesha Ranasoma, CEO, Global Rubber Industries Ltd, while the moderator was PRISL Director of Education Prof.  Thinini Gunasekara.