Dorothy Dixers and curveballs

The Parliament of Sri Lanka has earned notoriety for Dorothy Dixers or pre-arranged questions that the ruling party backbenchers ask ministers to help highlight the government’s ‘achievements’ and tear the Opposition to shreds. This practice is not peculiar to Sri Lanka, but here the situation has manifestly got out of hand. The NPP MPs are always given ample time to ask free-kick questions, which are legion, but the government frontbenchers invariably obstruct the Opposition members who throw curveballs that ministers cannot face. Some ministers even request weeks to answer easy questions, demonstrating a callous disregard for the parliamentary process and accountability.

Opposition Leader Sajith Premadasa raised some pertinent questions in Parliament yesterday. Demanding to know why the government had issued a gazette, placing the National Commission on Women (NCW) under the Ministry of Women and Child Affairs, he pointed out that the integrity of the commission which was expected to function as an independent body to protect, promote and advance women’s rights, would be undermined if it was placed under a particular ministry. He tabled the gazette notification at issue, disputing the government’s claim that no such document existed. While the Opposition Leader was demolishing the NPP’s arguments, some government members rose to their feet, shouting and accusing him of violating Standing Orders.

Party leaders should have some leeway when crucial matters are discussed in the House, where a lot of time is wasted on innocuous matters. The NCW is expected to safeguard the rights of women who account for about 52 percent of the country’s population. Parliament, therefore, should allocate enough time for discussions on matters pertaining to the NCW and allow the Opposition to express its views freely. After all, politicians act sensibly only when they are out of power. They take leave of their senses when power goes to their heads. Therefore, the public has a right to know the Opposition’s views on matters of national importance. There is nothing stupider than to go by what the ruling party politicians say about issues that adversely affect their own interests.

Governments with steamroller majorities tend to shout down their political opponents in Parliament. We have witnessed this for decades. Powerful regimes, intoxicated with power, cherish the delusion that popular mandates are special licences for them to do as they please and that an electoral defeat deprives the Opposition of its right to express its views and question government policies. The J. R. Jayewardene government did everything in its power to railroad the Opposition of the day into submission, but in vain. The Mahinda Rajapaksa government did likewise and went so far as to debilitate the Opposition by engineering dozens of crossovers. The JVP tore into those regimes, condemning their dictatorial actions, endeared itself to the public, and succeeded in turning the tables on the main parties and capturing state power. Unfortunately, the JVP-led NPP government has failed to be different.

Those who are familiar with the Westminster traditions are aware that the Opposition plays a vital role in a democracy, and deserves the opportunity to speak and raise questions in Parliament because that is a prerequisite for ensuring scrutiny, accountability and democratic legitimacy. The Opposition is duty-bound to question government actions, challenge executive decisions and take up policy flaws. Sri Lankan politicians ought to learn from the UK House of Commons, where the Opposition enjoys the freedom to question and criticise ministers. There are also “Opposition Days” allocated in the House of Commons for discussions on subjects chosen by the non-government parties. There are 20 days allocated for this purpose per session (under Standing Order 14). The JVP-led NPP came to power, promising a radical departure from the country’s rotten political culture. Sadly, it is moving along the same old rut as its predecessors it vehemently condemned for undermining democracy.

Aristotle has said that it is the mark of an educated mind to be able to entertain a thought without accepting it. Those who seek to suppress dissenting views in Parliament only demonstrate that they do not measure up to the Aristotelian standard.

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.