Biden Administration achieves greatest hostage exchange since Cold War sans fanfare

Trump can’t figure out if Kamala is Black or Indian, calls her husband a “crappy Jew”

During the two weeks after President Biden’s ultimate act of patriotism in deciding not to seek re-election for a second term, the political climate in the United States has been energized with a number of totally unexpected and refreshing events.

Biden became the second man to decline re-election since Lyndon Johnson in 1968. The circumstances surrounding the decision by these presidents not to run for re-election had many differences, but forsaking personal ambition for the good of their party and country is the common theme that has distinguished their presidencies in history for their selflessness and patriotism.

Johnson, like Biden, was extremely popular with the Party at the beginning of their re-election years in 1968 and 2024, respectively. They both presided over booming economies. Johnson inherited and expanded on the “Great Society” of the Kennedy years, presiding over the landmark Civil Rights and Voting Rights Acts of 1964 and 1965. The Age of Camelot, memorable for his soaring oratory, charisma, his determination to win the space race, and his courage in staring down Russian premier, Nikita Khruschev during the Cuban missile crisis, made Kennedy the most popular and admired Leader of the Free World.

In stark contrast, Biden inherited from Trump a medical crisis with hundreds of thousands of Americans dying because of his criminal mismanagement of the pandemic, a record $7.8 trillion added to the gross federal debt and an economy floundering on the cusp of recession. A nation so racially polarized as never before and internationally despised because of Trump’s subservience to America’s adversaries.

Biden will be recognized as one of the greatest presidents in US history. He has, during his first term, achieved impressive bipartisan legislation, with the slimmest of majorities in the Senate and a hostile House, which has made America, according to the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank, currently the strongest economy in the world. And he has regained the international respect for America which Trump, the most contemptible president in US history, had squandered with his ignorance, arrogance and vulgarity. A man who showed no love for the country, its people and allies, just a deep, psychotic love for Donald Trump.

The biggest hostage release since the end of the Cold War, which is happening as I am writing, is a further testament to the excellence of the Biden administration’s behind the scenes diplomacy over the years with America’s long-standing allies, especially Germany. Work done without a thought of personal glory, which has been the trademark style of Biden’s presidency. Both President Biden and Vice-President Harris were aware of the ongoing negotiations to free American hostages unjustly held in Russian prisons for years. The deal was virtually clinched just before Biden’s decision not to run for re-election, culminating in a call with the German Chancellor, Olaf Scholz and President Putin. Amazing restraint, both by Biden and Vice-President Harris, whose only thought was to reunite innocent American hostages with their families, with no motive of claiming a singular diplomatic triumph.

Donald Trump, miffed at Biden’s success which had eluded him in spite of his much-vaunted relationship with Putin, stated that he could have got a much better deal if he had been president, as Biden had “paid far too much money and given away too many sanctions”. The usual lie, as no money had been paid and no sanctions conceded; the exchange was concluded with the exchange of prisoners from seven countries. Trump could never have succeeded in concluding such an agreement, as he had incurred the hostility of the nation’s allies, especially Germany, whose co-operation was central to the deal.

Trump’s running mate, Vance made a characteristically weird comment that Putin agreed to the deal because he was sure of Trump’s re-election in November, and wanted to re-establish their erstwhile close relationship. Putin may be a murderer, but he is certainly no fool. He has realized, like most of us, that Trump is toast, and aims at establishing a working relationship with the new Harris administration.

President Biden and Vice President Harris were present to welcome home the released hostages, Wall Street Journal reporter, Evan Gershkovich, Marine veteran Paul Whelan and dissident Alsu Kurmasheva, on American soil at Andrews Airbase, Maryland on Thursday night. It was an intensely emotional and joyous event.

Johnson’s involvement in escalating the Vietnam war not only eroded his popularity but was causing dissension and dividing the nation. In a TV address to the nation on March 31, 1968, Johnson announced that he was ceasing all bombing raids against North Vietnam, called for immediate peace negotiations with Hanoi, and shocked his listeners by concluding his message with these words: “I shall not seek, nor will I accept, the nomination of my party for another term as your president.

“And I pledge to you, that we will not delay, or we will not hesitate, or we will not turn aside until Americans of every race and color and origin in this country have the same right as all others to share in the process of democracy.”

Johnson’s speech announcing his decision not to run in 1968 expressed sentiments strangely similar to those of President Biden, as shown by the extracts from his speech from the Oval Office on Wednesday, July 24, 2024: “I revere this office. But I love my country more. It’s been the honor of my life to serve as your president.

He said he believed his record as president “merited a second term, but nothing, nothing can come in the way of saving our democracy. He acknowledged that uniting party and country required sacrificing personal ambition for the greater good.

“The great thing about America is here, kings and dictators do not rule. The people do. History is in your hands. The power is in your hands. The idea of America is in your hands.

“I’ve decided the best way forward is to pass the torch to a new generation. That’s the best way to unite our nation.

“I look forward to getting back on the campaign trail next week, exposing the threat of Donald Trump and his Project 2025 Agenda, while making the case for my own record and the vision I have for America. One where we save our democracy, protect our rights and freedoms and create opportunities for everybody”.

Different words, different eras, that nevertheless showed the deep love of honorable leaders for the democracy of a country that belongs to all, with equal rights, freedoms, opportunities and compassion for everyone.

Seventy five percent of the American electorate was sick of the constant spectacle of two old men, constantly bickering as to who could count up to ten faster, whose major achievement was to negotiate the steps of Air Force One without stumbling, vying for the toughest job in the world. The announcement of an educated, experienced, articulate, YOUNG candidate for the presidency has brought an unprecedented surge of enthusiasm and fresh air among voters of all stripes, even moderate Republicans. And almost palpable fear among the Trumpsters, as they see their lead against Vice-President Harris evaporating by the day.

Election volunteers for the Democratic election campaign, who were running at two to three hundred a day, had reached 170,000 in the first seven days; all fund-raising records were broken, donations exceeding $200 million in the first week after Biden’s announcement.

Biden immediately endorsed Kamala Harris to take his place as the presumptive Democratic Party nominee for the presidency, saying “she’s experienced, she’s tough, she’s capable”. Kamala has now collected the electoral votes necessary to confirm her as the presumptive Democratic presidential candidate for the November election. She has also received vital endorsements of former President Barack Obama and Michelle, former Speaker, Nancy Pelosi and the entire Democratic Congress; and even more significantly, the vocal support of many prominent Republican politicians.

Before Biden made his announcement not to seek re-election, Trump had already picked his running mate, J. D. Vance, at the Republican National Convention in Milwaukee on July 17, four days after the assassination attempt on July 13. The investigation into this near-catastrophe is ongoing.

Trump escaped with a minor injury to his earlobe, but a much greater tragedy to the Republican Party may have been his Vice-Presidential choice of 39-year-old Vance. Vice Presidential hopefuls are usually selected to provide balance to the ticket, based purely on electoral impact – the assets a prospective candidate will bring to shore up the ticket. Qualifications involving age, color, ethnic origin, geographic region, religion, class and other factors which will help the candidate to win the election, and if elected, be qualified to take over the most demanding job in the world at a moment’s notice.

Vance brings none of the above to the table. He’s a younger, more educated, still as perverted a version of Trump. He is already being talked of as the Make America Great Again (MAGA) leader to carry on Trump’s authoritarian, corporation- and billionaire-friendly policies. The fact that Vance was available for sale to the highest bidder was apparent by the fact that he was a Never Trumper – in 2018, when he described Trump as America’s Hitler – before he was financed to purchase a Senate seat by neo-Nazi Silicon Valley billionaire, Peter Thiel, in whose deep pockets Vance and his family are now comfortably ensconced. Thiel’s best-known quote is, “I’ll vote for Donald Trump even if you hold a gun to my head”.

Trump’s desperation is beginning to show as Kamala’s surge in the polls and the energy she has inspired show no signs of abating. His rants of authoritarianism are getting more violently manic by the day. Last Friday, at an event hosted by a conservative advocacy group in West Palm Beach, Florida, he said. “Christians, get out and vote. You won’t have to do it anymore. Four more years. You know what? It’ll be fixed. It’ll be fine. You won’t have to vote anymore, my beautiful Christians”.

Trump has also resorted to his old race-baiting playbook. During an interview last week at a Convention of the National Association of Black Journalists, in Chicago, Trump was questioned about his recent racist comments about Kamala Harris’ ethnic heritage. Trump’s response: “Is Kamala black? I thought she was Indian. When did she turn black? Is she a real American?”

Harris’ father and mother were first generation immigrants from Jamaica and India, respectively. Kamala was born in 1964 in Oakland, California, a natural-born American. In a country where 33 million kids, including those of Trump’s running mate, Vance, are biracial, being a natural-born American is the only requirement of citizenship necessary for the presidency. Harris showed her class and maturity by not even responding to Trump’s patently racist language. She let Trump’s words of divisiveness and disrespect speak for themselves. Her only comment was, “the American people deserve better”.

Kamala also displayed a refreshing sense of humor. When asked if she had ever smoked pot, she laughed and said, “Man, I am from Jamaica. What do you think?”

Trump’s racist comments at this Convention had immediate results. The United Auto Workers Union (UAW), the largest trade union in the country endorsed Harris the day after the Convention.

Kamala Harris is taking her time in the selection of her running mate. Her choice will be announced on Tuesday, August 6. Her task in finding a potential Vice-President to outdo Vance will be less than formidable. Vance recently famously said, on Fox News, that the US was being run by “a bunch of childless cat ladies who are miserable in their own lives and the choices they’ve made and so they want to make the rest of the country miserable too”.

Nowhere in the world can Kamala find a running mate capable of antagonizing millions of American ladies who love cats, and others who have made the personal choice of not having children, or are unable to do so, in one fell swoop. Vance compounded his MAGA identity by publicly announcing that he is against all abortions, with no exceptions, Draconian laws completely denying women reproductive freedoms only matched in Sri Lanka. If Trump has any sense, he’d drop Vance like a hot potato, and soon.

Kamala has an embarrassment of riches in her choice for a running mate. The current favorites are Mark Kelly, (60) Governor of Arizona, Josh Shapiro (51), Governor of Pennsylvania, both battleground states, and Tim Walz, (61), Governor of Minnesota, who has an exceptional record of enacting progressive measures in his state, and is a feisty Democrat who would relish the opportunity of debating the cat-hating Vance.

Kamala also has a remarkable group of loyal politicians and administrators who will not only help her to bury Trump in November, but will also support her in carrying out her progressive agenda, which will go a long way in fulfilling America’s promise.

Kamala Harris concludes her autobiography, written in 2018 when she was a Senator during the Trump administration, with the words that all Americans should heed in these dangerous times:

“Years from now, our children and grandchildren will look up and lock eyes with us. They will ask us where we were when the stakes were so high. They will ask us what it was like. I don’t want us just to tell them how we felt. I want us to tell them what we did”.

If I may be permitted to end on a personal note, Vice-President Harris’ question will without doubt be asked one day by kids of my American grandchildren’s generation. I will be long dead, but I am relieved that my mediocre forays into journalism since Trump soiled the political environment of the most beautiful country in the world; a country which gave me a second chance and my children the opportunities they have successfully seized; will provide my own grandchildren with my answer to that question.

Even from 10,000 miles away, I stand with Kamala. When I look at Kamala, I see America.

JRJ encapsulates his autobiography in a 1992 post retirement book

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.