Two distinguished leaders join the board of AIA Insurance Lanka

AIA Insurance Lanka last week announced the appointment of two eminent corporate leaders, Mr. Hiran Asoka Pieris and Mr. Deepthi Prasad Lokuarachchi, to its Board as Non-Executive Independent Directors.

“These appointments demonstrate the Company’s continued focus on adding considerable depth of experience, independent judgement, and strategic insight to its Board to support the Company’s growth trajectory,” the news release on the appointments said.

Mr. Hiran Asoka Pieris brings to the AIA Board, a strong foundation in financial management and governance, supported by many internationally recognised professional qualifications. He has built a distinguished career spanning both executive and non-executive director roles across a range of industries, providing him with broad based cross-sector perspective and well-rounded insights.

He is a Fellow of the Chartered Institute of Management Accountants (CIMA), UK, an Associate Member of the Institute of Chartered Accountants of Sri Lanka, and a Certified Global Management Accountant. Drawing on Mr. Pieris’s professional grounding and local and overseas experience, he provides to AIA Board, disciplined financial judgement and a clear focus on long term, sustainable value creation.

Mr. Deepthi Prasad Lokuarachchi adds a rich blend of insurance and healthcare leadership experience, built over a distinguished career spanning multiple sectors functioning in Board and Executive capacities. He holds a Bachelor of Laws (LL.B) degree from the University of Colombo and is an Attorney at Law, having been admitted to the Bar of Sri Lanka.

In addition, he is an Associate of the Chartered Insurance Institute of the United Kingdom and holds the professional designation of Chartered Insurance Risk Manager. His professional background offers invaluable perspectives on the integration of insurance and health care services. Mr. Lokuarachchi’s experience will particularly support AIA’s strategic focus on strengthening health insurance and related healthcare initiatives.

AIA Insurance Lanka Chairman Biswa Misra and Director/CEO Chathuri Munaweera welcoming Messers Pieris and Lokuarachchi to the Board, acknowledged their outstanding careers and wide-ranging experience across diverse sectors. They expressed their strong confidence that the depth of knowledge and perspectives of the new Non-Executive Directors will be invaluable in guiding the Company’s growth and success.

Shipping giant Maersk to take over Panama Canal ports after court ruling

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.