Chinese Ambassador to Sri Lanka says confused over Jaffna University’s non-cooperation

ECONOMYNEXT – Chinese Ambassador to Sri Lanka Qi Zhenhong said he is confused over non-cooperation by Sri Lanka’s Northern Jaffna University on education cooperation between the two countries despite active participation from Beijing.

As part of education cooperation, China has been in the process of establishing mutual agreements between Sri Lanka’s local state universities and Chinese counterparts, citing to provide more opportunities to Sri Lankans.

However, the University of Jaffna in the former war zone in the Northern Province of the island nation close to South Indian Tamil Nadu state has been not actively cooperating with the process, the Chinese Ambassador said.

“We don’t know why they are not cooperating to improve the partnership cooperation,” Zhenhong told reporters on Tuesday when he responded to questions raised by journalists at Jaffna Press Club.

“One thing confuses me is that when my colleague communicates with Jaffna University, it seems like the university is not very active in promoting cooperation with the Chinese side. They have something to comprehend,” he said.

“It seems like that university is not very active. This seems like it seems like they are afraid of something, or concede a lot of things. I don’t know why.”

However, Zhenhong said the cooperation with Jaffna University is already in the process and there are some Chinese scholars currently working in a research study in Jaffna University.

“And every year Jaffna students will also go to China for scholarship programs, although the number is not very large for now. But it shows a very good sign between us.”

“I can recall that for the past three consecutive years. The Chinese government has provided the ambassador’s scholarship for students In Jaffna University.”

In 2022, The Chinese Embassy in Sri Lanka donated 4.3 million rupees to support the welfare of the 82 students of the University of Jaffna under the Chinese Ambassador’s Scholarship Scheme .

The Chinese Embassy last month called applications from the needy undergraduate students of University of Jaffna for scholarships targeting students from low income families.

Culture and education cooperation are used by many foreign countries as soft power to make people-to-people connections.

China and India along with Pakistan have been giving a large number of scholarships for Sri Lankans to pursue higher education.

Both China and India also have been giving training for Sri Lanka’s state sector employees as well as military personnel. (Colombo/November 21/2024)