CMTA urges policy stability, demands level playing field

The Ceylon Motor Traders’ Association (CMTA) has urged the government to maintain uniform and stable policies for the automobile sector, so that corporates can plan their businesses for the long run and attract foreign investments.

Former CMTA Chairman Charaka Perera said successive governments have changed the tax structure or the duty structure of the motor industry almost on an annual basis.

“This is quite evident if you look back 10 to 12 years, and that has created volatility and instability for the trade where we all operate.

“If you run through the changes, one could get an idea of what had taken place in the last decade.

“In 2014, the duty on hybrids and EVs was drastically reduced, which created a heavy influx of EVs into the country when the market was not ready. In 2015, to counter that, the duty was reduced for petrol vehicles. Then in 2016, the duty was increased on hybrids and EVs, because the influx was too heavy. In 2018, the whole duty system was changed from value-based to capacity-based. In 2019, due to the influx of high-end, expensive or low-capacity vehicles in a larger context, a luxury tax was introduced. And in mid-May this year, another 50 percent surcharge was imposed on vehicles for just three months, up to August 15.

“Likewise, almost every year, there were changes to the duty structure, which impacted the motor trade and the demand that existed for vehicles,” Perera said at a media briefing held in Colombo last week.

“This type of volatility and instability creates uncertainty in the minds of the consumer. When the consumer’s mind is uncertain, obviously, it impacts the sale. Companies operating in this trade find it very difficult to project sales and orders, which creates overstocking or sometimes a rush of imports, just to take advantage of duty changes,” he emphasised.

In addition to duty, Perera said another change concerned the loan-to-value (LTV) ratio, a key determinant of demand and affordability in the motor trade.

“The loan component was about 50 percent of the vehicle value in early 2025. In July, it went up to 60 percent. Then in November, it came down to 50 percent again. And in May this year, it went down further to 40 percent. So this again creates a reduction in affordability when the LTV ratio goes down. When you couple the LTV ratio fluctuation and the duty fluctuation, it creates a lot of volatility. Thus, we urge the government to support long-term stability of the industry, mainly through duty and other related taxes, where corporates can really plan their businesses for the long run,” he added.

Concerns were also raised over the market share held by authorised brand-new vehicle importers, who make up the CMTA membership. Of all the vehicles imported last year and up to July 2026, brand-new vehicle importers accounted for only 30 percent, while the remaining 70 percent came in through other importers.

“My view as an outside investor is that there has to be a level playing field and the right market. This is the only market where I have seen only 30 percent held by normal business and the rest through other channels. I didn’t see that happen in any part of the world where I have worked. About 30,000 Nissan and Suzuki vehicles have entered Sri Lanka through channels outside the authorised distribution network after the market opened. The revenue leakage for the government here too is substantial,” said Jawahar Ganesh, Group Managing Director of Associated Motorways Ltd, a subsidiary of Dubai-based Al-Futtaim Group.

“With a better market, we can plan for a longer term. We have committed payments. We will invest more. Our intention is to do that, but the market size has to be there. The market size is artificially lowered due to the policy,” he said.

“I do believe the government is taking good action towards political stability, but policy stability is very important.”

CMTA is one of Sri Lanka’s oldest trade bodies. Founded in 1919 and affiliated with the Ceylon Chamber of Commerce, it represents major global automotive manufacturers through local franchise holders.