France reaffirms long-term support as AFD Group marks 20 years in Sri Lanka

Seated from left: AFD Group Regional Director for South Asia Yazid Bensaid, Ambassador of France to Sri Lanka Rémi Lambert and Deputy Minister of Foreign Affairs and Foreign Employment Arun Hemachandra

France has been alongside the Government of Sri Lanka during several emerging crises, which have challenged its modern history in the past two decades and will remain committed accompanying the country on its path towards a more prosperous, resilient and sustainable future, a French envoy said.

The Ditwah, economic crisis and international challenges in the Strait of Hormuz are some of these key issues including not forgetting the 2004 Tsunami catastrophe, where France has brought financing, technical expertise and international partnerships to support sustainable development, climate resilience and inclusive growth.

Ambassador of France to Sri Lanka Rémi Lambert made these remarks as the Agence Française de Développement (AFD) Group celebrated its 20th anniversary celebrations with Sri Lanka, at a banquet held in Galle Face Hotel last week.

AFD Group Regional Director for South Asia Yazid Bensaid addressing the gathering said AFD has mobilised financing and expertise across key sectors including water and sanitation, renewable energy, urban development, education, climate action and food systems. “Over the past two decades, AFD-supported projects have connected 80, 000 people to safe drinking water, improved road access for 200, 000 people, strengthened wastewater and sanitation planning, and supported Sri Lanka’s transition towards a greener economy.

Sri Lanka has enormous potential a highly educated population, rich biodiversity and a strategic position in the Indian Ocean Despite recent economic challenges, AFD Group remains confident in the country’s capacity to build a more resilient and sustainable future,” he said.

In the energy sector, AFD has provided €74 million in financing to support renewable energy generation and modernisation, helping avoid an estimated 480, 000 tons of CO emissions while contributing to the country’s objective of generating 70 percent of its electricity from renewable sources by 2030.

The AFD Group’s engagement extends beyond sovereign financing. Through Proparco, its private-sector am, the Group has supported Sri Lankan businesses and financial institutions since 2008, promoting access to finance for SMEs, agribusinesses, microfinance and green investments.

Deputy Minister of Foreign Affairs Arun Hemachandra also graced the occasion.