Cycle Brands launches  new fragrance and website at ‘Scent & Sparkles 2025’

Cycle Brands, which promotes incense products, recently took a remarkable step by launching four new fragrances and creating a convenient online access to its customers and partners at ‘Scent & Sparkle 2025’.

Held at the Golden Rose Hotel in Boralesgamuwa, Cycle Brands introduced four exclusive fragrances to its already existing and rich collection, expanding the choices and options to their increasing customer base. At ‘Scent & Sparkle 2025’, Cycle Brands also launched its official website, with the prime intention of creating a convenient passage to its customers to purchase products online, marking an important strategic leap into the digital age.

The management staff, along with the Sales and Marketing teams, participated in the event. Using ‘Scent & Sparkle 2025’ as a platform, the Sales team showcased their creativity, hidden talents, and performance skills, making the event colourful and engaging. The highlight of the event was the stylish and theatrical launch of four new fragrance products, adding excitement while celebrating the team’s creativity and energy.

Renowned for its commitment to innovation and product diversity, Cycle Brands provided an electrifying platform for its team to exhibit their creativity and deepen their understanding of their brand portfolio during the product and website launch, which were the primary goals of the colourful event. The members of the sales team aptly took the opportunity to showcase their creativity, while adding a lively atmosphere to the celebrations.

The evening commenced with a graceful opening ceremony, soon giving way to a captivating drama performance. Through vibrant performances, they brought to life the stories behind Cycle Brands’ core products — Pushkarini Incense Sticks, Her Majesty Body Mist, Stop O Power Bag, and Stop O Power Brick, emphasising each product’s unique selling points.

Important among the highlighted products, Pushkarini Incense Sticks, a product with traditional and ayurvedic ingredients, is certified as zero carbon and burns for over an hour. Priced at Rs. 150, Pushkarini Incense Sticks can be used at any event as well as for meditation. Her Majesty Body Mist, priced at Rs. 1390, is a luxury body mist at an affordable price that comes in four different fragrances – Pink Blush, Floral Miss, Silk Musk and Summer Song.

Stop O Power Bag, an Air Freshener that can be used for homes, vehicles, and bathrooms, has the certification of the International Fragrance Association. Priced at Rs. 320, it comes in seven different fragrances of Apple Cinnamon, Melon, Pink Petals, Citrus Zing, Tangerine, Amber Rose and Green Harmony, and lasts a minimum of 30 days. Stop O Power Brick, an effective solution that can be used to keep bathrooms fresh for a minimum of 30 days, has been approved by the International Fragrance Association. Priced at Rs. 300, it comes in four different fragrances -- Lavender, Amber Rose, Soothing Sandal and Jasmine.

The official corporate website of Cycle Brands, where customers could easily access to purchase their range of fragrance products, including the newly introduced, was unveiled by Cycle Brands Chief Executive Officer Anuradha Ekanayake. The new digital platform also serves as an informative hub for consumers and partners, reflecting the company’s commitment to innovation and digital evolution.

The evening closed with a heartfelt tribute to the founding members, honouring their passion and dedication behind Cycle Brands’ journey in Sri Lanka. ‘Scent & Sparkles 2025’ was more than a celebration; it was a reminder of their people-driven vision and the belief that every product can touch lives.