McLarens Group and Koko forge strategic partnership

Initiative to enhance accessibility of 3M and Meguiar’s products in Sri Lanka

McLarens Group, the distributor of world-renowned brands 3M and Meguiar’s in Sri Lanka, has announced a strategic partnership with Koko, the island’s leading Buy Now, Pay Later (BNPL) platform.

Customers looking to buy high-end car care, homecare, stationery, personal safety and the entire product range both online and offline will benefit from this innovative partnership’s increased convenience and flexibility.

Through the McLarens Online Store (mll.lk/products) and the retail location at Union place, McLarens now offers Koko’s three interest-free instalment option for its extensive selection of 3M and Meguiars products. Customers can now enjoy top-quality products with hassle-free payments.

McLarens Group has a strong presence across various key sectors in Sri Lanka. As a trusted partner for numerous international brands, they have continued to maintain global standards of quality and service to the Sri Lankan

McLarens-3M CEO/Director Dilan Seneviratne said: “As a company that prioritises the needs of its consumer, we are constantly looking for methods to improve cost and accessibility. Our continued dedication to offering our customers smarter, more convenient solutions is demonstrated by our partnership with Koko. This is only the beginning; we look forward to launching many more attractive deals and promotions soon.”

Koko, backed by Daraz and Alibaba Group, is Sri Lanka’s top Buy Now, Pay Later platform. Sri Lankans progressively use Koko daily for both aspirational and essential purchases. As disposable incomes rise and vehicle imports return, Koko is positioned to help people afford quality products, especially for car care.

Koko/Daraz BNPL Regional CEO Michael Sathasivam said: “At Koko, our goal is to enable everyday consumers to make smarter and more flexible financial decisions. By collaborating with McLarens, a reputed brand spanning across multiple industries, we can make this convenience available to more people who respect reliability and quality. We are eager to collaborate in order to transform the way that customers in Sri Lanka perceive high-end brands.”

This collaboration opens a new chapter in McLarens’ mission to provide global-quality products that are easily and relevantly localised. Customers now have more flexibility to enjoy 3M and Meguiar’s performance, enabling more people to improve their vehicle, household and workplace maintenance practices without sacrificing quality.