ComBank wins 5 including double Gold at CA Sri Lanka TAGS Awards 2025

Reinforcing the Bank’s commitment to upholding the highest standards of corporate reporting and best governance practices, the Commercial Bank of Ceylon has won five major awards including two Golds at the 2025 TAGS Awards of the Institute of Chartered Accountants of Sri Lanka (CA Sri Lanka), demonstrating its strong focus on Transparency, Accountability, Governance, and Sustainability.

Presented at a ceremony at the Shangri-La Hotel, Colombo, the awards recognise the Bank’s 2024 Annual Report titled ‘In Context – From turbulence towards tranquility’ for excellence in disclosure across multiple dimensions of transparency and governance.

Commercial Bank received the Overall Silver award for Excellence in Corporate Reporting, underscoring the strength and comprehensiveness of its financial reporting. The Bank also clinched the Gold award as the winner in the Banking Sector and a second Gold for Corporate Governance in the Financial Services Sector under the Special Awards Category.

Further affirming the robustness and clarity of its integrated disclosures, the Bank won the Silver award for Integrated Reporting in the Special Award Category, and a Bronze award for Digitally Transformative Reporting, another Special Award Category.

“These accolades affirm that our commitment to transparency and governance is not episodic, but embedded in the way we conduct our business,” Sanath Manatunge, Managing Director/CEO of Commercial Bank commented. “The 2024 Annual Report was compiled at a time when Sri Lanka was transitioning from economic turbulence towards greater stability. In that context, clear, candid and comprehensive reporting becomes even more critical. Our objective was to present not only our financial performance, but also the discipline, resilience and strategic clarity that underpin sustainable value creation. This recognition by CA Sri Lanka is a tribute to the professionalism of our team and the robustness of the Bank’s reporting framework.”

The TAGS Awards evaluate annual reports on the pillars of Transparency, Accountability, Governance and Sustainability, and are widely regarded as Sri Lanka’s benchmark for corporate reporting excellence. Recognition in these categories reflects Commercial Bank’s continued commitment to upholding the highest standards in financial reporting while adapting to evolving regulatory requirements, stakeholder expectations and global best practices.

The Smart Phone Shop unveils Sri Lanka’s largest mobile phone experience center

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.