Buddhist Monks’ Peace March

We have been hearing about and seeing YouTube videos on the peace march undertaken by Buddhist monks in the United States of America. It is a long distance pilgrimage by monks from the Huong Dao Vipassana Bavana Centre in Fort Worth, Texas, to promote peace, compassion and non-violence. The walk began on October 26 last year and the idea is to traverse 2,300 miles and reach Washington DC in February this year, walking barefoot but you now see them in walking shoes or plain rubber shoes. Their companion is a dog, Aloka, who is now a symbolic figure.

The walk started in Fort Worth, inspired by 19 Vietnamese monks who bravely started the march. They went through many States like Louisiana, Mississipi, Alabama and Georgia. They are now in Carolina, I presume, soon to pass Virginia. En route they talk to people, make addresses, even give short sermons conveying the messages of the Buddha. They carry slogans and distribute bracelets and possiby pirit nool. People who gather to venerate then ask for such protective symbols. So far the monks have not met with opposition or obvious demonstrated disapproval. On the other hand they are received cordially and what they hope to teach and promote accepted readily. We hope in Washington DC Trump will not bear down on them.

On November 19, while the march was on in Dayton near Texas, a truck struck the group’s escort vehicle and two monks were seriously injured. One had to be transferred by helicopter to a hospital in Houston and he had a leg amputated. In spite of this serious impediment, the march was continued, probably with the metta message enhanced. After recovery, they rejoined the Peace Walk. Aloka, the guide dog, who had been on previous Marches even in India, too developed as injury which is common in dogs, He was treated and joins the march off and on.

Their message of promoting world peace through each person developing compassion and peace within oneself will surely promote peace among neighbours, peoples, nations and the world. It is accepted as a fact.

Here in Sri Lanka, we don’t have peace marches, but in the mornings and evenings the environment is saturated with pirit and the repetition of the five precepts. The sharp contradiction is that with Buddhism around and its tenets repeated twice daily, there is so much violence and murder and mayhem occurring.

I don’t write politics in this column. But I take a political situation and show how much enmity and almost militant protest there is. My choice of situation is the protest against education reforms and wanting to send home the Prime Minister, who is also Education Minister. No subtlety or decency in the criticism. The opponents wish to bring a vote of no confidence in her. This is far too drastic a measure. What has been done is removing a web site of sexual references from a 6 Grade text book. Who thinks our children don’t know people have various sexual preferences. Also Dr Harini Amarasuriya is highly educated. To have her heading the country as PM is fine, so also as Minister of Education.

Sri Lanka’s First Successful Public–Private artnership: South Asia Gateway Terminal, Port Expansion and Maritime Development for the Future

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.