Sri Lanka’s power & energy minister declares support for president

ECONOMYNEXT — Power & Energy Minister Kanchana Wijesekara has declared his support for President Ranil Wickremesinghe, becoming the first cabinet minister representing the ruling Sri Lanka Podujana Peramuna (SLPP) to do so.

“I pledge my support to President Ranil Wickremesinghe for the upcoming presidential election. The majority of the SLPP Parliament group will also extend their support to the President to continue the reforms and policy’s towards greater economic stability and the betterment of the country,” Wijesekara tweeted Tuesday July 30 afternoon.

Wijesekara told reporters Monday evening following the party’s decision that a faction of the party to back Wickremesinghe’s candidacy.

“We will try to get the party’s support for president,” said Wijesekara, who had already come out publicly in support of the president.

Wijesekara’s official declaration on Tuesday came after several members of the SLPP defied a decision by the party to not back the president at the forthcoming election.

Earlier in the day, State Minister of Finance Shehan Semasinghe expressed support for Wickremesinghe. He was followed by State Minister of Defence Pramitha Bandara Tennakoon and Anuradhapura district SLPP parliamentarian S M Chandrasena.

Sri Lanka President Ranil Wickremesinghe has thanked legislators who have supported him through his presidency and has invited those who have yet to join him.

Hours of the SLPP decided not to back him at the 2024 presidential election, Wickremesinghe tweeted Monday July 30 night that his administration needs the support of every willing hand to build a prosperous, united Sri Lanka.

President Wickremesinghe said he is ready to welcome the MPs who have yet to join him.

“Our mission to build a prosperous, united Sri Lanka is ongoing, and we need every willing hand to make it a reality. This journey hasn’t been easy, but by coming together, we’ve started to turn the tide. Together, we will create the Sri Lanka we all believe in. Thank you for your dedication, courage, and commitment to our country’s future,” he said. (Colombo/Jul30/2024)