UNDP and IFC helping Sri Lanka to discover financial inclusion

The barriers to financial inclusion have been a longtime problem in Sri Lanka as financial literacy has thus far been the prerogative of only the nation’s affluent customers.

However, eventually the Central Bank of Sri Lanka, 40 other national institutions, the public and private sector of the country along with the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) and the International Finance Corporation (IFC) are now looking to help broaden financial literacy among the general public of the country to help them achieve financial freedom without allowing it to remain an exclusive right anymore.

This was revealed when the Financial Literacy Roadmap of Sri Lanka (2024-2028) was unveiled at the Central Bank of Sri Lanka on May 21st 2024.

The roadmap developed under the Financial Literacy and Capacity Building pillar of the National Financial Inclusion Strategy (NFIS) quite obviously incorporates sequenced actions proposed by the United Nations Development Programme and the International Finance Corporation (IFC) which were described by the Central Bank Governor Dr. Nandalal Weerasinghe as vital partners in rolling out the roadmap.

Introducing Mr. Beewise – the Sri Lankan Financial Literacy Expert in the first-ever financial inclusion roadmap for Sri Lanka, the multi-stakeholder knowledge tank promotes two aspects leading to financial inclusion in Sri Lanka; namely, knowledge and skills and attitude of the Sri Lankan general public by taking a cue from the busy bees.

“Bees, skilled in searching for and using resources reflect the value of knowledge to steer the day to day life prudently. The skills bees demonstrae in collecting nectar and producing honey reflect the practical skills needed in finance, budgeting, saving, investing and managing debt. And that is why we are referring to the analogue of the bee in this context,” said UNDP Resident Representative for Sri Lanka, Ms. Azusa Kubota.

“One of the mandates the Central Bank has been given is Financial Inclusion, and our endeavor towards this national agenda is strengthened and supported by the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP), the International Finance Corporation (IFC) and the members of the National Financial Inclusion Council,” said CBSL Governor Dr. Nandalal Weerasinghe.

“Financially literate people make informed decisions about savings, investments and borrowings. They are more likely to understand the impact of the monetary policy decisions we take, and respond appropriately in line with monetary policy stance, contributing to effective monetary policy implementation.”

“Secondly, financially literate consumers will make informed choices and will demand efficient, transparent and responsible culture from the financial institutions rather than we need to regulate them all the time. Financial literacy will increase public trust in the financial system by supporting individuals to understand how the financial system works. This understanding is very important for the public to make their financial decisions. Further, financial consumers will be empowered to safeguard themselves against financial frauds which are growing with the new of technologies. More importantly, financial literacy can support reducing over-indebtedness and alleviating poverty.”

“Informed access to financial services enables people to manage their finances better, save for the future and invest in opportunities that benefit them. In the long run, this will reduce the burden on the government in terms of having to provide a social safety net, and will enable them to have better living conditions. Financially literate people can come out of poverty from their own financial decisions. A forward looking aspect of financial literacy advocates equipping the future generations with necessary financial capabilities to be financially resilient when they become adults. So, it is important for them to acquire financial literacy at school and university level.”

“Thus investing in financial literacy will be an investment in higher social and economic returns. So there are clear social and economic benefits out of financial literacy in any country. In this backdrop, the Central Bank of Sri Lanka is striving to improve the financial inclusion landscape of Sri Lanka through various initiatives.”

“The introduction of National Financial Inclusion strategy in 2021 with the help of all stakeholders by the Central Bank is currently in its implementation phase. That marks a significant milestone. The new CBSL Act entrusts the duty of promoting financial inclusion. The mandate has been given to the CBSL to formally promote financial inclusion. This road map provides an evidence based policy framework aimed at positively changing the financial behavior towards the betterment of the general public in Sri Lanka.

“Thirdly, creating of vigilant consumers is important to ensure consumer protection. As a whole, the implementation of this roadmap will be crucial in realizing the aspirations of financial inclusion in Sri Lanka,” he said.

Sri Lanka Tourism performs a successful stint at the Arabian Travel Market – 2024 in Dubai, UAE

JKH records strong Q4 2023/24 with recurring EBITDA growth of 20% to Rs.13.97 billion

Cross Border Partnership: It’s ‘JumJum’ for PickMe in Nepal— IFC endorses move to support Nepal’s startup ecosystem

US Ambassador Chung joins finale of UNDP’s Mobile Interactive Exhibition in Batti

UNDP’s mobile interactive exhibition showcasing women’s empowerment initiatives in Nuwara Eliya

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.