Cabinet nod for developing Sri Lanka’s World War II-era Hingurakkogda airbase

ECONOMYNEXT — Three months after the government announced plans to revamp the World War II-era Hingurakkgoda airbase to an international airport, Sri Lanka’s cabinet of ministers has approved a proposal to develop it into a fully fledged airport.

The Government Information Department said on Tuesday June 25 that a joint proposal by President Ranil Wickremesinghe in his capacity as Minister of Defence and Minister of Ports, Shipping and Aviation Nimal Siripala de Silva to “make preparations to develop Higurakgoda Airport as a complete airport”.

According to the statement, the purported preparations will be based on the recommendations made by a committee comprising representatives of the Sri Lanka Air Force, the Sri Lanka Civil Aviation Authority, Airports and Aviation Company (Sri Lanka) (Pvt) Ltd and the Road Development Authority. The committee was appointed to formulate a master plan for the airport and related tasks.

“Higurakgoda Airport is currently operated under the management of the Sri Lanka Air Force and the need to develop the airport in accordance with international civil aviation standards has been identified,” the statement said.

In early April, Aviation Minister de Silva said Sri Lanka plans to revamp the Hingurakgoda airport to an international airport.

The minister said at a discussion that the objective is to turn the Hingurakgoda airport into an airport dedicated to civil aviation.

“The previous budget had allocated 2 billion rupees for this for this year. Until the construction of the airport is complete, from annual budget estimates, the money needed for this will be provided.

“Our final target is like Mattala and Palali to make this a dedicated airport for civil aviation, not domestic but international,” he said.

The Hingurakgoda airport, originally known as Royal Air Force Minneriya, airport goes back to the days of World War II, serving as a base for the British Royal Air Force. (Colombo/Jun25/2024)