Turkey’s foreign policy seen as vital to navigate current world instability

The Turkish government’s foreign policy priorities in a period of heightened global turbulence, stressing diplomacy, dialogue, and cooperation are essential tools for navigating an increasingly unstable international environment, Turkey’s Ambassador to Sri Lanka Dr. Semih Lütfü Turgut said.

‘The turbulence and uncertainty of recent years have carried forward into 2026, with unresolved conflicts, shifting power balances and declining respect for a rules-based international order, Dr. Turgut explained at a foreign policy round table conducted recently by the Pathfinder Foundation Sri Lanka at the Colombo Club, Hotel Taj Samudra. It was presided over by Pathfinder Foundation Chairman, retired Ambassador Dr. Bernard Goonatilleke.

The Turkish ambassador stressed that while geography may separate Türkiye and Sri Lanka, both countries share a common aspiration for peace, stability and sustainable development at regional and global levels and emphasised the importance of strengthening bilateral, regional and multilateral cooperation at a time when collaboration is of the utmost importance.

Dr. Turgut added: ‘International relations are increasingly shaped by differing perspectives and interpretations of geography, history, and power.

‘Conflicts in seemingly distant regions can have significant ripple effects worldwide, reinforcing the need for informed and flexible foreign policy approaches.

‘The ongoing wars in Ukraine and Gaza are defining crises of the present era.

‘These conflicts demonstrate both the limits of military power and the deep humanitarian costs of war, while also exposing a certain duplicity in the international system. The fragile nature of ceasefire efforts, particularly in Gaza, called for sustained international engagement to prevent further escalation and human suffering.

‘Of considerable note is the continued instability in the Middle East, including developments in Yemen, Iran and the Horn of Africa, as well as rising tensions in Europe and East Asia.

‘Increasing militarisation, proxy rivalries and geopolitical competition risk further erosion of global stability, while economic pressures and austerity measures could fuel political extremism in many regions.

‘Ankara’s approach is anchored in regional peace, stability, and independence. Türkiye continues efforts to mediate between Russia and Ukraine, emphasising the importance of securing the Black Sea for global food security.

‘Full membership of the European Union remains a strategic priority for Türkiye and its engagement in Central Asia through the Organization of Turkic States with its focus on economic cooperation in energy along with transport corridors is important. Diplomacy remains the most effective and least costly instrument of foreign policy, particularly at a time of resource constraints and global uncertainty.

‘The international community needs to prioritise dialogue over confrontation and should uphold the principles of sovereignty, non-interference and cooperation in the pursuit of lasting peace.’

Dialog introduces Blackview 5G Smartphone and Tablet to advance digital inclusion

Local entrepreneurs propose high-quality saree manufacturing in Sri Lanka to curb forex outflow

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.