FCCISL congratulates NPP; pledges support for economic and governance reforms

The Federation of Chambers of Commerce and Industry of Sri Lanka (FCCISL) has extended its congratulations to President Anura Kumara Dissanayake, newly appointed Prime Minister Dr. Harini Amarasuriya, and the members of the Cabinet on their recent appointments.

In a statement, FCCISL acknowledged that the formation of the new Government, featuring a streamlined Cabinet of just 21 key portfolios, signals a commitment to efficiency and reform, marking the start of a transformative era for Sri Lanka.

“This structure reflects a commitment to efficiency and streamlined administration. As the representatives of the nation’s vibrant business community, we are encouraged by the promises made by the National People’s Power (NPP) to foster good governance, transparency, and accountability,” it added.

“The people of Sri Lanka have placed their trust in this leadership and are eagerly awaiting tangible action to fulfil these pledges,” the FCCISL noted, emphasising the corruption, inefficiency, and mismanagement in any form are no longer acceptable to a nation yearning for change.

“The public is waiting for this Government to walk the talk and deliver results that will lead the country toward economic stability, equitable development, and social justice,” it added. The Federation expressed optimism in the abilities of the newly appointed ministers to deliver meaningful and efficient governance that promotes economic stability, equitable development, and social justice.

“The FCCISL stands ready to support the Government in all its efforts to uplift the nation. President, Board of Directors of FCCISL along with its vast network of business partners, is committed to collaborating with the new administration to achieve shared goals that enhance the lives of all Sri Lankans,” the statement added.

As the representatives of Sri Lanka’s business community, the Federation reaffirmed its commitment to working closely with the Government to achieve these goals.

“Together, let us seize this opportunity to lay the foundation for a brighter, more sustainable future for Sri Lanka,” the statement noted.