HNB offers tailored leasing solutions for Forton, GWM Vehicles with SENOK

HNB Senior Vice President and Head of Retail Banking Kanchana Karunagama (left) and Senok Trade Combine Deputy Managing Director Ranjan Dahanayake along with officials of the two companies

HNB PLC, has forged a strategic partnership with SENOK Trade Combine Ltd., strengthening access to commercial and lifestyle mobility solutions across the country.

The partnership marked a significant milestone in HNB Leasing as the Bank deepens its role in enabling progress for entrepreneurs’ businesses and individuals. Enabled by this alliance, customers gain access to tailored leasing solutions for Forton brand vehicles including vans, pickups and GWM SUVs alongside world renowned JCB and KOBELCO construction machinery represented by SENOK.

HNB’s Senior Vice President/Head of Retail Banking Kanchana Karunagama said: “This collaboration comes from a simple belief that when customers have access to the right assets at the right time their ideas can truly move forward. At HNB we stay close to our customers understand their real needs and stand by them with financial solutions that support growth, productivity and long term economic strength.”

As Sri Lanka evolves with growing demand for reliable transport and heavy duty machinery this partnership delivers timely value by combining financial expertise with trusted automotive and engineering brands.

SENOK Trade Combine Deputy Managing Director Ranjan Dahanayake said: “This partnership brings together two organisations that understand the real demands faced by customers on the ground. Together with HNB we are making it easier for businesses and individuals to access reliable vehicles and machinery that support daily work and long term progress.”

This partnership underscores a shared commitment to quality trust and progress. Together HNB Leasing and SENOK are shaping a future where access to reliable mobility and machinery supports growth across industries and communities island wide.