Robotics startup Scouts and Vidullanka launch first ever drone enhanced security

Scouts and Vidullanka teams next to the Autonomous Drone and Dock system manufactured in Sri Lanka

Scouts, a homegrown Sri Lankan team that designs, manufactures and deploys advanced drone-based safety solutions, has launched its first autonomous aerial security system in partnership with Vidullanka PLC. The deployment, completed on September 2026, comes just 11 months after the fast-growing startup began operations.

What Scouts has built is a complete end to end service consisting of hardware, software, and intelligence managed entirely by a homegrown team. The drone has the capability to identify, alert and patrol, dramatically enhancing the capabilities of the security team, empowering them to cover more land, efficiently and safely, thus allowing them to respond to threats more effectively. For large properties, drone-based monitoring can support infrastructure management and environmental observations, improve operational efficiency while reducing time spent for continuous ground patrols.

Scouts’ systems are equipped with 4K and Thermal cameras, AI- based detection of anomalies such as damaged fencing, vegetation encroachment, equipment maintenance and inspections, fires and other risks, adding a layer of robustness through real time situational awareness. The three-part system consisting of a pilot-less (automated) drone, a weatherproof dock and charging station, enhanced with artificial intelligence for anomaly identification and rapid response, is now deployed at Vidullanka PLC’s two solar power plants with a combined capacity of 4MW, these facilities add approximately 7.7 gigawatt-hours of renewable electricity annually, helping reduce a significant amount of carbon dioxide emissions each year.

Vidullanka PLC is a Sri Lankan clean-energy company that has developed hydro, solar and dendro biomass plants across the country and expanded into Africa and South America. In 2025, the company became the first power-sector organisation in Sri Lanka to align with domestic emissions-reduction targets and achieved carbon neutrality across its operational portfolio. Its mission and vision reflect a commitment to profit, people and the planet while pursuing global growth.

Scouts Co-founder and CEO Kalana Muthumuni said: “This partnership signals a new era of technology that enhances Sri Lanka’s visions to develop critical manufacturing expertise locally, while establishing services for autonomous drones to monitor large estates, plantations and other clean energy infrastructure. Our system empowers security teams on the ground, allowing them to provide regular, efficient patrols over areas that are otherwise difficult and costly to cover through conventional means.”

First client to use Scouts’ autonomous system Vidullanka PLC Director of Operations Roshan Siriwardena said: “At Vidullanka, we continuously integrate innovation, automation and emerging technologies into our renewable-energy operations to enhance efficiency, reliability, safety and sustainability. Deploying AI-powered autonomous drone technology at our solar power plants marks another significant milestone in our digital-transformation journey.”

“We are particularly proud to collaborate with Scouts, a homegrown Sri Lankan startup, demonstrating how local technological innovation can deliver world-class solutions. This partnership reflects our commitment to embracing Industry 4.0 technologies, supporting Sri Lankan entrepreneurship, and building smarter, safer, and more sustainable renewable energy operations for the future.”