EDB with SriLankan Airlines promotes Sri Lanka Expo 2027

The Sri Lanka Export Development Board (EDB) recently unveiled a specially branded Airbus A321 Neo aircraft of SriLankan Airlines, liveried with the Sri Lanka Expo 2027 brand identity, to promote Sri Lanka Expo 2027, the country’s premier international exhibition.

The expo will comprehensively showcase Sri Lanka’s diverse export sectors including agriculture, industrial manufacturing, export services, innovation and tourism.

The special event held to mark the departure of the newly branded aircraft was attended by EDB Chairman and CEO Mangala Wijesinghe, Director General Erandika Dissanayake, Director Export Services and Sri Lanka Expo 2027 Project Lead Indumini Kodikara, Sri Lanka Expo 2027 Consultant Coordinator Anoma Premathilake and a number of officials from SriLankan Airlines.

Operating under the guidance of the Industry and Entrepreneurship Development Ministry, the EDB will organise the Sri Lanka Expo 2027 international exhibition from January 14 to 17, 2027, at the BMICH, Colombo.  This landmark event is strategically designed to position Sri Lanka as a vital trade and investment hub within the South Asian region.

The exhibition is poised to host over 750 prominent exhibitors and welcome more than 1,500 international buyers and investors.

In addition to the main exhibition, the event will feature an array of parallel high-level forums including a dedicated investment forum, industry-specific sessions and structured B2B matchmaking meetings. To provide a holistic experience of Sri Lanka’s economic and cultural dynamism, the event will also feature fashion shows, culinary shows and rich cultural performances.

The newly branded Airbus A321 Neo will fly across SriLankan Airlines’ key operational regions including India, Indonesia, Saudi Arabia, Qatar, the Maldives, Malaysia, Kuwait and Thailand, carrying the Sri Lanka Expo 2027 brand to travellers and the trading community across these regions.

As part of this partnership, SriLankan Airlines will also offer discounted airfares for the visiting foreign buyers and investors attending Sri Lanka Expo 2027, up to 20 percent and 10 percent in Economy and Business Class, respectively.