Accidental meeting with former UNchief at a UNESCO cafeteria in Paris

One rainy day in September 2003, I was having lunch at the UNESCO cafeteria. Kofi Annan was the Secretary General of the UN at that time. The cafeteria was on the top floor of the UNESCO building. The view of Paris from there was panoramic, where one could see both the Eiffel Tower and Arc de Triumph.

An elderly gentleman excused himself and sat in front of me with a soup and a baguette. Being the only two at the table, we began a conversation. My fellow diner did not have a name tag like the rest of us who were employees. He said he lived in Paris and occasionally drops in at the UNESCO for a meal. I surmised that he must be a retired former employee.

As we sat, many who passed by the table paused to chat with him and he conversed fluently in whatever language he was spoken to, be it French, Spanish, Italian, or English. A woman who spoke Spanish, bent, and kissed him.

When I told my dining companion that I was originally from Sri Lanka, he went into raptures about Neville Kanakeratne, Shirley Amerasinghe and Lalith Athulathmudali, and lamented that none of them were around anymore. His pronunciation of Sri Lankan names was perfect.

By and by, he asked me whether I knew that Pablo Neruda lived in Ceylon for some time?. Which, of course, fortunately I knew. Neruda won the Nobel Prize for Literature in 1972 writing in Spanish and was Consul for Chile in Ceylon (now Sri Lanka) in the late 1920s.

This was an opening for him to talk about Shirley Amerasinghe’s contribution to the Law of the Sea Convention. And he concluded by saying that Lalith was the brightest he had met of the Ceylonese. And then he sprung the question.

Sadly, I had to admit that my knowledge of them was limited to what I had read about them. I, of course, agreed that Lalith was very intelligent, based on his brilliant career. It also saddened me to realize then that Sri Lanka, which produced so many able and internationally reputed intellectuals, was not able to find people of such stature to lead the affairs of the state in the 21st century.

After about 40 minutes of very interesting conversation, including the invasion of Iraq by Bush Jnr, it was time to go. We both got up.

He smiled, shook hands across the table, and said, “Javier Perez de Cuellier from Peru”. I was dumbfounded. I had been chatting to the 83 -year old former Secretary General of the UN.

Perez de Cuellier died in 2020, aged 100. De Cuellier was a two term UN chief who brokered the peace agreement between Iran and Iraq in 1988.

That the night, I shared a bottle of champagne with my teetotaller wife at our apartment.

(Excerpted from an anthology of memoirs by Nihal Kodituwakku) ✍️

Empowering the next generation: A vision for students’ leadership in Sri Lanka

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.