Nestlé Lanka celebrates business partnerships at ‘Connect@Nest’24’

Nestlé Lanka recently held the ‘Connect@Nest’24’ event, to honour and recognize the valued business partnerships of the ‘Good Food Good Life’ company. This felicitation event brought together a diverse array of business partners across the value chain, all of whom contribute to Nestlé Lanka’s vision of delighting Sri Lankan consumers with products filled with taste and goodness.

With an established local footprint of over 115 years, Nestlé Lanka remains true to its purpose of ‘unlocking the power of food to enhance quality of life, for everyone today and for generations to come’ with the support of its trusted business partners. As the largest food and beverage company and home to some of Sri Lanka’s most loved brands, Nestlé Lanka remains committed to its vision of offering tastier and healthier choices from early childhood to old age, ensuring the highest quality products are provided to consumers across the country. These products are brought to life through the dedication and support of business partners across the value chain, ensuring the highest quality standards are maintained from farm to table.

‘We continuously work on building trust with our business partners, with a dedicated focus on empowering and guiding them towards Nestlé and industry best practices – upholding our unwavering commitment to excellence. Connect@Nest’24 is the ideal platform to recognize our business partners for their dedication towards our vision of providing products filled with taste and goodness to our beloved consumers across Sri Lanka’, commented Bernie Stefan, Managing Director of Nestlé Lanka.

‘The unwavering dedication and commitment of our business partners has been instrumental in overcoming obstacles even during uncertain times, and ensure we provide the best quality products to our consumers. Connect@Nest’24 was organized to appreciate the consistent support of our business partners and recognize their efforts in helping us delight Sri Lankan families with Nestlé products’, said Mr. Kanchana Fernando, Director – Supply Chain at Nestlé Lanka.

Nestlé has been an integral part of Sri Lankan lives for over 115 years. The company manufactures over 90% of its products locally at their state-of-the-art factory in Kurunegala, employing strict safety and quality controls. Driven by its purpose of ‘unlocking the power of food to enhance quality of life for everyone, today and for generations to come’, Nestlé caters to consumers across generations from early childhood to old age through its diverse food and beverage portfolio.

‘Record year for Sarvodaya Development Finance as profits and assets soar’

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.