Dilith Jayaweera’s solution to Sri Lanka’s increasing brain drain

The Government Medical Officers’ Association (GMOA) has met with the presidential candidate of the ‘Sarvajana Balaya’ alliance, entrepreneur Dilith Jayaweera today (27), in order to discuss the current issues in the health sector.

During the discussion, the representatives of the GMOA pointed out that one of the major issues prevailing in the health sector is the rising brain drain in the country. They emphasized that despite repeated warnings, no effective solutions have been provided by the relevant authorities to address the problem.

Commenting regarding the issue, presidential candidate Dilith Jayaweera highlighted that this is a critical issue concerning Sri Lanka’s human capital and human resources management, adding that the country lacks a comprehensive government strategy for managing human resources.

“It is essential for Sri Lanka to develop such a strategy. Combined services should be separated based on their unique characteristics. The public service is a combination of dissimilarities brought together by considering a very few similarities,” he added.

Furthermore, Jayaweera said: “The top priority to create a ‘Happy Nation’ is to ensure the health and well-being of the people. Therefore, we suggest that we should invest more on the health sector and the doctors in order to keep the nation healthy. We hope to submit the necessary proposals to our National Strategic Program to address this on the 31st.”

Speaking to the media following the discussion, the Secretary of the GMOA Dr. Prabhath Sugathapala stated that compared to other presidential candidates, Dilith Jayaweera has a proper vision and understanding of the problems in the health sector.

“We actually met about 7 presidential candidates. The discussions with them were prolonged. When compared with the other discussions, scientifically speaking, Mr. Dilith Jayaweera has some knowledge on the matters we are talking about. That means he had recognized the solution we are proposing as the solution. That is the uniqueness. That’s something we’re happy about,” he added.