Trump rally at Madison Square Garden, NY, welcome October surprise for Democrats

Democracy under threat, as Trump sows doubt on election integrity

President Ronald Reagan, “The Great Communicator” was famous for conceptualizing the American Dream, in a loose paraphrasing of the words enshrined in the Statue of Liberty.

Concluding his farewell speech in 1988, Reagan said, “I’ve spoken of the Shining City all my political life….But in my mind, it was a tall, proud city built on rocks, stronger than oceans, wind-swept, God blessed, and teeming with people of all kinds living in harmony and peace; a city with free ports that hummed with commerce and creativity. And if there had to be city walls, the walls had doors and the doors were open to anyone with the will and heart to get here. That’s how I saw it, and see it still.

“And how stands the city on this winter night? More prosperous, more secure and happier….And she is still a beacon, still a magnet for all who must have freedom, for all the pilgrims from all the lost places who are hurtling through the darkness, toward home”.

Next Tuesday’s election, and its aftermath, will be held in unique circumstances. The vote, bar a miracle, will no longer matter. The nation’s democracy appears to have already succumbed, its journey towards the Shining City on the Hill all but abandoned.

Trump, backed by his white supremacist, MAGA (Make America Great Again) movement has been chipping away at the nation’s democracy from the day an African American was elected to the highest position in the land, in 2008. A feeling of racist resentment which became progressively more malevolent as President Barack Obama rescued the country from the recession caused by the reckless expenditure and human lives lost in an illegal war, waged by the previous Republican administration of George W. Bush.

And rescued it with the most ethical, graceful, competent presidential terms in history, which ended with a booming economy of 75 consecutive months of economic development, with the highest job growth and the lowest unemployment rate in decades. Without a trace of personal and political scandal. A performance of excellence that served to stoke with even more intensity the resentment of the racist white population.

None more than narcissistic and racist New York billionaire, Donald Trump, who was envious to the point of psychosis of the admiration that President Obama was universally held.

When Donald Trump took center stage of the Republican Party in 2016, Mitt Romney, Republican presidential candidate of 2012, warned Americans to face the reality of Donald Trump’s presidential campaign: “His domestic policies would lead to recession; his foreign policies would make America and the world less safe; he has neither the temperament nor the judgment to be president; and his personal qualities would mean that America would cease to be a shining city on a hill”.

America ignored the wisdom behind these prophetic words and elected Trump to the presidency in 2016. Fortunately, Americans came to their senses during Trump’s first term. Recognizing his narcissistic incompetence, his criminal mismanagement of the Covid pandemic, which resulted in the avoidable deaths of 650,000 Americans, and the authoritarian path Trump was treading, Americans unceremoniously fired him, by a landslide, in 2020.

Incredibly, white Republicans, suffering from a serious case of selective amnesia, have gone back to the leadership of a man who was a convicted fraud and rapist, even in 2016. A man under whose presidency the United States endured a near-recession and the contempt of the free world. A convicted felon who was impeached twice during his presidency, and convicted, arrested and on trial on 91 counts of felonies, including sedition, obstruction of justice and espionage, after his defeat in 2020.

A man who has successfully aroused and taken advantage of white America’s basest instincts, whose violent, racist policies beg Ronald Reagan’s question:

According to Trump, the beautiful shining city “has become the dumping ground, a garbage can for the rest of the world…. Immigrants invade the Southern border; they are murderers, they are rapists, they bring drugs; they come from the prisons and insane asylums of shithole countries from all over the world”.

According to Trump’s agenda, if re-elected, he plans the construction of detention (concentration) camps and mass deportation programs for up to 20 million illegal and some categories of legal immigrants. He agrees with Hitler’s concept of the mixing of races, when Hitler wrote in his manifesto, Mein Kampf (My Struggle), “All great cultures of the past perished only because the originally creative race died out from blood poisoning”.

In fact, all great cultures of the past perished only by the genocidal massacres of the marauding Europeans, led by the masters of the game, the Anglo-Saxons.

Trump’s dark language about immigrants being vermin who “poison the blood of people” is based on a scientifically spurious theory of eugenics, the deeply dishonest “scientism” that criminality, violence, poverty and idiocy are the direct results of genetics. Nazis used eugenics to justify the extermination of entire races in Europe in the mid-20th century.

Trump, in his ignorance, recently applied this theory of eugenics to his presidential rival, Vice-President Harris, when he stated at a recent speech in Erie, Pennsylvania, that “Lyin’ Kamala Harris is mentally impaired; honestly, I believe she was born that way….And I just don’t know what it is, but there’s definitely something missing”.

Sure there is. Both Kamala’s parents received their PhDs from the University of California, Berkeley. Kamala’s father, Donald Harris, a Jamaican, now 86 years of age, was the first black Professor Emeritus of Economics to receive tenure at Stanford University, CA. Her mother, a South Indian from Chennai, was a biomedical scientist engaged in research into breast cancer at the Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory at Berkeley, CA. She was 70-years-old when she died of colon cancer in 2009.

Vice-President Harris overcame these terrible genes and graduated with a law degree from the Hastings College of Law in California. Starting her career as a prosecutor in the District Attorney’s office in Alameda County, CA., she is now the Vice-President of the United States of America.

Trump’s rally at Madison Square Garden last Sunday, the Republican Party’s “closing argument”, was described by the New York Times as “a carnival of grievances, misogyny and racism”. On the other hand, Donald Trump described it as a night filled with love. Trump’s brand of love that’s usually followed by rape and insurrection.

As he said at a recent campaign speech in Wisconsin, “whether the women like it or not, I’m going to protect them”. Like he has “protected” numerous women against their will, for which “protection” he has been convicted for sexual assault in the past!

The roster of speakers at the Madison Square Garden rally was brimming with the most racist and vulgar of speakers. A comedian described Puerto Rico, an American territory, as “a floating island of garbage”. He went on to insult Latinos, blacks, Jews and Palestinians, American citizens, who constitute significant minorities in many swing states.

Pennsylvania, a must-win state, currently deadlocked, has a Puerto Rican population of 470,000 (5%) out a total electorate of 6.8 million, which Biden won by a mere 70,000 (1%) votes in 2020.

These Americans minorities, especially the Puerto Ricans in Pennsylvania, will hopefully show their anger at the denigration of their homelands at the ballots on Election Day.

Kamala Harris was variously and viciously described at the rally as a prostitute, the Antichrist and the Devil. Trump also talked about getting the military, after he wins re-election, to arrest, court martial and possibly execute his political and military “enemies from within”. Disgusting rhetoric wildly applauded by Trump supporters.

A campaign rally never to be surpassed in hard-core bigotry and sheer vulgarity and lies, blithely dismissed by Republican candidate for the Vice-Presidency, JD Vance as “some people can’t take a little joke”!

Trump endeared himself even more to women at a rally in Pennsylvania, when he said, “women will be happy, healthy, confident and free when I am your president. You will no longer be thinking of abortion”. A strange statement from the man who killed Roe v. Wade which denies women’s reproductive freedom. An issue that may cost him the election.

The Russia-based disinformation campaign against Harris and Walz has already started. The quaintly named “R – FBI (Russian Federation for Battling Injustice) has already spread a rumor on social media that Harris shot an endangered rhino while on Safari in Zambia and Walz sexually assaulted a student in Minnesota. I suppose we should be thankful that Kamala didn’t sexually assault the rhino, and Walz didn’t shoot the student!

Whatever the result – win, lose or draw – next Tuesday, the pestilence of Trumpism, the MAGA movement, backed by the Billionaires’ Club, is here to stay. The richest man in the world, Elon Musk, is now actively campaigning for and financing Felon Trump. The decision to refuse to endorse Harris by the owners of the liberal Washington Post and Los Angeles Times, billionaires Jeff Bezos and Patrick Soon-Shiong, is regarded as an indication that billionaires are jumping on the Trump bandwagon.

Perhaps America has finally outlived the dream of the Shining City on a Hill. Trump has managed to polarize the nation through hatred and fear of immigrants, taking advantage of the racism that has plagued the white, Christian population through the ages.

Trump and the Republicans have sowed so much distrust in the integrity of the electoral process that every aspect of the process, especially in the vital battleground states, is subject to intense scrutiny and suspicion.

No democracy can function without complete confidence in the integrity of its elections and the peaceful transfer of power, which Trump and his white supremacist mob undermined in 2021, and will violently challenge, if he is defeated next Tuesday.

If Trump wins, even by the smallest of margins, the Republican Party agenda as outlined in Project 2025 will go into immediate effect. Trump will be the de facto dictator, acting on the instructions of his billionaire backers. Political opponents will be jailed, the media silenced and the constitution terminated, to be replaced by an updated constitution, modeled on Project 2025.

If Vice-President Harris wins, by whatever margin (remember Trump has still to concede the 2020 election, which Biden won by a landslide), Trump will dispute every inevitably close result in Tuesday’s election, especially results in the swing states, without a shred of evidence. He has already started the process, accusing Pennsylvania of cheating, and claiming at a rally in New Mexico “Your votes are rigged”. With a totally partisan and corrupt Supreme Court, the nation will be embroiled in a constitutional crisis for an indeterminate period, accompanied by sporadic violence.

The Shining City is now political rubble in the depths of the ocean. Democracy in the most beautiful, the most blessed nation in the world has been stolen by a narcissistic, power-hungry psychopath, backed by an oligarchy of billionaires, with authoritarianism and kleptocracy snapping at its heels.

Kamala Harris gave a powerful closing argument last Tuesday before a crowd of over 75,000 at the Ellipse, the symbolic venue that Trump made his infamous rant, inciting his supporters to storm the Capitol, to hang Vice-President Pence and to violently curtail the peaceful transfer of power, on January 6, 2021.

The core of Harris’ speech was that she intends to be the president for all Americans, even those who disagree with her. She’ll give them a seat at the table, unlike Trump, who plans to put his political opponents in jail.

If anyone can perform the miracle of reversing the process and restoring the nation’s progress towards rebuilding the Shining City, that would be Vice-President Kamala Harris. She has already performed one miracle. She has brought ultra-right conservative Liz Cheney and extreme left Bernie Sanders and Alexandra Ocasio Cortez under the same Democratic tent.

Kamala Harris and the women of America can bury Trump. In a landslide.

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.