Men’s Cricket World Cup 2027 venues and brand revealed

July.31 - ICC Men’s Cricket World Cup makes its much-anticipated return to Africa after 24 years, with the event set to take place across three countries.

Twelve venues across South Africa, Zimbabwe and Namibia were announced as the hosts for next year’s ICC Men’s Cricket World Cup.

A spectacular ceremony in Johannesburg saw eight cities across South Africa, three in Zimbabwe and Namibia’s capital Windhoek unveiled as co-hosts for the tournament.

Fans can now register their interest to receive information on ticket sales and other updates for the tournament that will take place next year.

The marquee 50-over competition returns to Africa after 24 years. Back in 2003, South Africa, Zimbabwe and Kenya hosted the eighth Men’s Cricket World Cup.

Set to host the world’s top 14 teams, the three host countries for 2027 are united by a spirit of optimism, diversity and community under the ‘Three Nations, One Heartbeat’ brand.

The 14th edition of the showpiece event is set to host the cricketing community from across the world, imbued with the African message of ‘Ubuntu’, a philosophy that translates to “I am, because we are”, the belief that we as humanity are defined by our compassion, kindness and connection to one another.

This is in line with the ‘Make the Circle Bigger’ philosophy, which is at the heart of the ICC Men’s Cricket World Cup 2027, bringing together a rich tapestry of cultures, 29 officially recognised languages and a lifestyle and vast mosaic of identities that unite the region.

"This marks an exciting milestone on the road to the ICC Men’s Cricket World Cup 2027," ICC Chairman Jay Shah said.

"The unveiling of the host cities and the tournament brand signals the start of a journey that will unite fans around the world and build anticipation for one of our sport’s biggest global events.

“The return of this prestigious tournament to Africa after 24 years is a landmark moment for cricket. We are confident that South Africa, Zimbabwe and Namibia will deliver an unforgettable event, showcasing the warmth, passion and rich diversity that make this region truly unique."

ICC CEO Sanjog Gupta added, "The ICC Men’s Cricket World Cup represents the legacy and spectacle of Limited Overs Cricket.

"It also marks the return of the pinnacle event to Africa after more than two decades and will celebrate a continent defined by extraordinary people, vibrant cultures, breathtaking experiences and deep love for Sport.

"The vibrant brand unveiled today reflects the energy, ambition and spirit of the event, while every host city offers fans a unique opportunity to experience the warmth and diversity that make Africa truly memorable.

"Combined with the meaning delivered by the growth of the game and inspiration for new generations of fans, the event will assume regional and global significance."

Also present to mark the momentous occasion were South Africa cricketing icons Graeme Smith, Makhaya Ntini, Hashim Amla, Temba Bavuma and Kagiso Rabada, alongside Zimbabwe's Hamilton Masakadza and Namibia's Rudolf Jansen van Vuuren.

The visual anchor of the much-anticipated tournament is derived from a single geometric form inspired by the African wire bowl, featuring colours such as Zimbabwe Chilli, the African Root, Fynbos pop, Namib Dune, Harare Dawn and Two Oceans.

Since having co-hosted the 2003 Men’s Cricket World Cup, South Africa have played host to a number of major ICC tournaments from the the inaugural ICC Men’s T20 World Cup (2007), the ICC Women’s T20 World Cup (2023), the ICC Under-19 Men’s Cricket World Cups (2020 and 2024) and the ICC Under-19 Women’s T20 World Cup (2023).

While Zimbabwe were also the co-hosts for the 2003 edition of the tournament, Namibia will roll out the red carpet for their maiden senior ICC tournament as hosts. Both countries had hosted the ICC Under-19 Men’s Cricket World Cup earlier this year.

The ICC Men’s Cricket World Cup 2027 will feature 57 matches, offering greater context, competitiveness and consequence with a new three-stage format that will deliver more competitive cricket and enhance the fan experience.

A Super Series will see the three teams ranked from 12 to 14 play a round-robin format, with the winning team moving on to the next stage. A 30-match round will feature 12 teams, with sides divided into two groups of six playing a round-robin format.

The top three teams from each group, along with the next best-placed team from both groups, will advance to the Super 7 stage.

The Super 7 will consist of 21 round-robin matches with the top four teams progressing to the semi-finals. The team that tops the Super Seven will play the fourth-placed side and the second-placed team will take on the third-placed side in the semi-finals. - ICC