India confident of Sri Lanka giving due care for concerns over Chinese research ship visits

ECONOMYNEXT – India is confident that Sri Lanka will give due care for the security concerns over the visits of Chinese research vessels, the Indian Foreign Secretary Shri Vikram Misri said.

The Foreign Secretary’s comments for questions at a media briefing came after Sri Lanka President Anura Kumara Dissanayake met India’s Prime Minister Narendra Modi on a three-day official visit.

“Our understanding is that the Sri Lanka government is looking at this issue,” Misri told reporters when he was asked if the Indian side discussed extending the ban on foreign research vessels.

Sri Lanka’s previous government has imposed a temporary one-year ban on all foreign research vessels visiting Sri Lanka for research purposes. The move came in December last year after strong security concerns raised by India.

“There are a number of considerations that they (Sri Lanka) need to take into account. We did highlight from our perspectives – the role that India could play in a number of activities maritime security, maritime research etc,” Misri said.

“We pointed to the importance and the sensitivity of our security interest in this area and President Dissanayake was very upfront in saying that he would ensure that nothing was done by using Sri Lanka’s territory that might impact India’s security.”

“So we will continue to engage with the government of Sri Lanka on all these issues and we are confident that issues of importance such as these will be given due care by the government of Sri Lanka,” he said.

Sri Lanka temporarily banned foreign research ships citing it wants to establish a SOP (Standard Operation Procedure) for such vessels and all other vessels before removing the ban.

Two Chinese research ships were allowed to dock in Sri Lanka ports within 14 months with one called for replenishment and the other for research.

In August 2022, Chinese navy vessel Yuan Wang 5 docked at Hambantota in southern Sri Lanka for replenishment.

Chinese research ship Shi Yan 6 arrived in Sri Lanka in October 2023 and docked in Colombo port, for what Beijing citing was for “geophysical scientific research” in collaboration with the island nation’s National Aquatic Resources Research and Development Agency (NARA).

Both drew strong Indian protests citing security concerns in the Indian Ocean.

India uses the Colombo port as its main transshipment hub and accounts for around 70 percent of the total transshipment volume of the port. (Colombo/December 16/2024)