Reform controversy: The plot thickens

Ranil Wickremesinghe, following his fortuitous elevation to the presidency in 2022, famously likened the unnervingly daunting task of saving a nosediving economy to Grusha crossing a collapsing rope bridge across an abyss, carrying a baby, in The Caucasian Chalk Circle. Thankfully, he completed that perilous journey, and handed over the baby to his successor President Anura Kumara Dissanayake. One can only hope that the baby will be safe.

As if the task of looking after one baby were not enough, President Dissanayake and Prime Minister Dr. Harini Amarasuriya have embarked on a journey across a different rope bridge, carrying another baby—educational reforms. There was absolutely no need for them to do so in a hurry. The critics of the government’s desperate efforts to impose its educational reforms on other key stakeholders, especially teachers, as a fait accompli, have pointed out that the JVP-led NPP is trying to implement what one of its predecessors crafted. Claiming that the government is seeking credit for Wickremesinghe’s educational reforms, a trade unionist has said President Dissanayake is strutting around, in Ranil’s trousers. The problem is not who is wearing whose trousers; it is that they are shoddily tailored and being worn the wrong way, back to front and inside out with waistband at the wrong level.

The ongoing controversy over educational reforms has taken a dramatic turn, with former Director General of the National Institute of Education (NIE) Prof. Gunapala Nanayakkara implying that some NIE bigwigs took the incumbent government for a ride. On Friday, speaking at a seminar, organised by the United Republic Front, on the educational reforms, Prof. Nanayakkara said the educational reforms the NPP government was trying to implement were based on the so-called Sedera proposals, and they had failed for want of proper leadership. Neither the Education Ministry nor the National Education Commission nor the NIE had provided proper leadership for the educational reforms, he said, revealing something that must have made the bigwigs of the incumbent government and its apologists see red.

Prof. Nanayakkara disclosed that in 2022 and 2023, the NIE had crafted hundreds of modules at a cost of Rs. 223 million. Those who were responsible for the module project faced an audit query; they were required to furnish proof of official approval for the project, Prof. Nanayakkara said, claiming that the NIE officials had craftily smuggled those modules into the current educational reform package in a bid to obtain cover approval. They had also prepared a PowerPoint presentation of the educational reforms, but it had left everyone none the wiser, he noted. This may be the reason why the government has not been able to meet the Opposition’s demand that a comprehensive document on its educational reforms be made public.

Interestingly, if Prof. Nanayakkara’s aforesaid claim is true, then one can argue that the modules at issue were prepared during the previous government, and therefore the Opposition, which bashes the incumbent government for a link to an adult website in the Grade 6 English module, is barking up the wrong tree. Or, is it possible that some modules were prepared during the current dispensation? The Education Ministry should reveal when the modules were prepared.

Prof. Nanayakkara’s claims are of crucial importance; they have shed light on another dimension of the educational reforms controversy. A separate probe should be conducted into the preparation of so many modules at a staggering cost, allegedly without formal authorisation. The government, however, cannot claim the assertion that some NIE bureaucrats took it for a ride in extenuation of its culpability, for it plunged head first into implementing the ill-conceived education reforms and has defended them ardently both in and outside Parliament. Now that it has given its imprimatur to the education reforms and started implementing them, there is no way it can disown the reform baby, as it were, much less absolve itself of the blame for them by throwing some NIE officials under the bus.

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.