AKD win major leftist coup, says Vasu; Sri Lanka “old left” wants in

ECONOMYNEXT — Former MP Vasudewa Nanayakkara, a foremost voice of Sri Lanka’s “old left” which later embraced left-nationalism, has decided to throw in his lot with the ruling National People’s Power (NPP).

Speaking to reporters on Tuesday October 08, Nanayakkara said the result of Sri Lanka’s September 21 presidential election was a “big leftist victory”.

“Our view is that we should join this government and support them. MPs elected from our Democratic Left Front (DLF) will not join the opposition. We will join the National People’s Power (NPP) government,” he said.

“I think we’re the only party that is making such a statement,” he added.

During the presidential election, the NPP pointedly refrained from joining forces with any establishment party or any other party or persons linked to former President Mahinda Rajapaksa, his family or the Sri Lanka Podujana Peramuna (SLPP) which Rajapaksa still leads. With the parliamentary election just five weeks away, the NPP has made no indication that it has changed its mind. Nanayakkara and the DLF have been backing the Rajapaksas for years, though, notably, it was the Janatha Vimukthi Peramuna (JVP), the party that controls the NPP, that was instrumental bringing the Rajapaksas to power in 2005.

The DLF leader claimed that the NPP government is already taking pro-people decisions without delay.

“This government imposed higher tariffs on imported  onions and potatoes overnight,” he said, referring to a 10-rupees-per-kilo increase on the levy on potatoes and a 20-per-kilo hike on big onions.

“Then there is the bond scam,” he added, claiming that former President Ranil Wickremesinghe was implicated in the scandal and that the government has also commenced investigations into it. Wickremesinghe has been cleared by a parliamentary committee probe, as recently declared by his Dhanushka Ramanayake, Wickremesinghe’s Presidential Media Director.

Nanayakkara said his DLF did try to contest the upcoming parliamentary election on the NPP ticket, though these discussions bore no fruit.

“We tried to contest together with them. During the presidential election, we attempted such a closeness. But that did not work out owing to a policy matter of the NPP’s,” he said.

“We will contest the parliamentary election on our own. We tell our supporters that a vote for us is a vote for the NPP,” he added.

The former MP also said that the DLF has effectively abandoned an agreement it had reached with the ‘Swarna Jana Balaya’ alliance that supported businessman and presidential candidate Dilith Jayaweera during the recently concluded poll.

“That election result is a big leftist victory. There is no point staying in intermediate parties. Yes, we have left that alliance,” he said. (Colombo/Oct08/2024)