Sri Lanka’s tuktukrental.com expands to Cambodia

ECONOMYNEXT – Sri Lanka’s tuktukrental.com, which allows tourists to rent tuk tuks, said it had expanded into Cambodia after, and was aiming to rope in 1,000 vehicles to its fleet by the end of the year.

In 2024, the firm said it had helped 600 tuk tuk owners earn 1.5 million dollars by renting to foreigners.

Driving tuk tuks in Sri Lanka is a unique travel experience that some foreigners like to try out.

“Leveraging our learnings from Sri Lanka, we are taking the next step in our journey with the expansion to Cambodia this year,” said Tom Cornish, Co-Founder at tuktukrental.com.

The expansion into Cambodia, which has wide use of motor bicycles, ensures it remains at the forefront of the rental market, the company says.

The company says it wants to provide exceptional travel experiences for tourists, while also improving the lives of tuk tuk owners.

“At tuktukrental.com, we believe in the power of tourism to transform lives and create unique experiences.”

The company offers quality tuktuks sourced from the local community, comprehensive insurance for all parties including third-party claims, pre-arranged special local tuktuk licenses, Sri Lankan driving etiquette lessons, and on-the-road travel kits.

tuktukrental.com also covers repair costs during trips, provides unlimited kilometers, and offers convenient pick-up and drop-off locations across Sri Lanka.

It’s the only tuktuk rental company registered under the Sri Lanka Tourism Development Authority.

Launched in 2016, tuktukrental.com has grown to become the largest tuktuk rental service in the world.

Having established it as a popular option for tourists seeking an authentic way to explore the island, the company has engaged with more than 12,000 tourists and facilitated over 15,000 rentals, they said.

The company recently held their annual Tuktuk Owners Conference, drawing owners from across the country, company directors, management representatives, and key partners from Vega Innovations, Orient Insurance, local police authorities, and mechanical partners. (Colombo/Aug1/2024)