Hemas Consumer Brands hosts Innovation Day, spotlights its R&D excellence

The rise of Hemas Consumer Brands (HCB) is a success story in the home and personal care segment in Sri Lanka. Its powerful local brands have repeatedly proven themselves to be the proverbial ‘David’, standing up fearlessly against the ‘Goliath’ of multinational FMCG companies. HCB’s brands have not only competed successfully but also captured competitors’ market share from global brands. Its ability to dominate in such a fiercely competitive arena rests squarely on its capacity for innovation. Bringing the full power of its innovation to the fore, HCB held an ‘Innovation Day’ which showcased every aspect of its innovation journey by organizing an international-level event attended by all its internal and external stakeholders to engender a strategic springboard for innovation and big ideas.

The objective of the ‘Innovation Day’, held at Trace City was to showcase the Company’s innovative culture, the talents of the R&D Team and to reveal the sheer volume of effort behind the scenes for each product. The event featured a variety of stalls, several webinars and live interactive sessions that showcased and exhibited over 150 products and packaging formats. Global reputed supply partners known for their product innovation which mirrors HCB’s journey participated at the Innovation Day, joining in from various parts of the world. Wayamba University also sent a team to showcase the power of natural ingredients and held a discussion booth at the venue. Collaboration has been key to HCB’s success. Impressed by the power of the ideas showcased at the event, HCB’s senior management selected several innovations to be fast tracked and launched. This inclusive approach to innovation has been transformative for HCB’s brands.

IMF encouraged by SL authorities’ commitment to continue reform efforts

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.