SLAF executes heroic CASEVAC mission

July 1 (Daily Mirror) - The SLAF Sri Aviation Unit deployed under MINUSCA successfully conducted a Casualty Evacuation (CASEVAC) mission in Am Dafok yesterday (30 June 2026).

The mission was launched following an attack on troops of the Zambian Battalion who were conducting an Area Domination Patrol in the Am Dafok area. During the incident, an unidentified armed group attacked the patrol using AK-47 assault rifles, RPGs and machine guns. The attack resulted in multiple casualties among Zambian Battalion personnel, civilians, Gendarmerie and other security personnel.

Initially, a helicopter from another aviation unit was tasked to carry out the troop inseColombo, July 1 (Daily Mirror) - rtion and CASEVAC mission. However, due to adverse weather conditions, the aircraft was unable to depart on time. As the situation on the ground continued to deteriorate, the Force Commander directed the Sri Aviation Unit to undertake the mission.

The mission was commanded by the Contingent Commander of the Sri Aviation Unit, Group Captain Asiri Pathirage, as Pilot in Command, with Flight Lieutenant Dilhash Athapaththu serving as Co-Pilot. The crew also comprised Flight Sergeant Hettiarachchi TS as Flight Engineer, Flight Sergeant Manoj AGG as Load Master, Corporal Wijethunga WMPP and Leading Aircraftman Abeysinghe GD as Air Gunners. The onboard Aeromedical Evacuation Team (AMET) comprised Flight Lieutenant Yadeesha Rathnasiri, Warrant Officer DM Sumathipala and Flight Sergeant Ruwankumara KPD The Mi-17 helicopter departed Bria Airfield and proceeded on tasking to Birao Airfield to embark reinforcement troops before conducting the evacuation of casualties from Am Dafok.

While en route, the tactical situation in Am Dafok deteriorated further as the number of casualties increased. The Force Commander subsequently reprioritized the mission and directed the helicopter to proceed directly to Am Dafok without embarking the reinforcement troops.

After approximately two hours and ten minutes of flight, the helicopter arrived at Am Dafok, where the helipad was only partially secured and the security situation remained volatile. The crew landed the aircraft, embarked the casualties while keeping both engines running to minimise ground time and departed the area immediately.

The AMET provided continuous medical care to the casualties throughout the flight. A total of 14 casualties were evacuated during the mission.

The helicopter first transported the casualties to Birao Airfield, where nine casualties comprising two Zambian Battalion personnel, one Central African Armed Forces (FACA) soldier, five Other Security Personnel (OSP) personnel and one civilian were handed over to the Level 1 Hospital.

The remaining five critically injured casualties, comprising one Zambian Battalion soldier, three civilians and one Gendarmerie member, were subsequently airlifted from Birao to Bria for onward transfer to a Level 2 medical facility, while receiving continuous care from the onboard AMET.