Missing guns

The government yesterday launched a campaign, Nation United – National Drive, to rid the country of the drug menace. There is no doubt a pressing need to neutralise the netherworld of crime and drugs. This task is best carried out without big shows, which might give the wrong impression to the rest of the world that Sri Lanka finds itself in the same predicament as countries like Colombia and is not safe for investors. Nevertheless, the public must fully cooperate with the law enforcement authorities to achieve the goal of liberating the country from the clutches of the drug Mafia.

President Anura Kumara Dissanayake, speaking at the launch of the countrywide drug bust, yesterday, lamented that a large number of firearms had found their way into the underworld. Disarming the underworld is half the battle in breaking the back of the narcotics problem. The President said: “Some of the firearms used by these groups come from our own state weapon stockpiles. Reports show that 73 T-56 rifles went missing from army camps — 35 have been recovered, but 38 are still in criminal hands. Even a senior army colonel has been found supplying ammunition in exchange for money. Some police officers have sold their own weapons and fled … This shows that organised groups, empowered by financial might, have managed to penetrate the state machinery. We cannot continue to ignore or hide this situation any longer.” One cannot but agree with the President that everything possible must be done to recover those lethal weapons. A special investigation must be conducted to seize all illegal firearms.

In 2023, the then State Minister of Defence Premitha Bandara Tennakoon revealed in Parliament that the defence authorities had issued about 700 firearms to 154 politicians in the late 1980s, when the JVP went on a killing spree, but none of them had been returned. This figure, we believe, is a gross underestimate.

Immediately after last year’s regime change, the MPs were asked to return the repeater guns they had obtained from the Defence Ministry, and they readily complied for obvious reasons. But those guns account for only a fraction of the weapons issued to politicians and others over the decades. In January 2019, the then Defence Secretary Hemasiri Fernando disclosed in Colombo that about 4,700 9mm pistols and revolvers had been licensed, but there was no information about those who had obtained them, and, worse, some of them possessed as many as 15 small firearms, each!

Besides, from 1987 to 1989, the then UNP government issued thousands of firearms with ammunition and a large number of grenades to politicians including Opposition figures threatened by the JVP. In his report, ‘In the Shadow of a Cease-fire: The Impacts of Small Arms Availability and Misuse in Sri Lanka’, Chris Smith, an expert on the proliferation of firearms, especially in South Asia, has said the weapons distributed among politicians during the aforementioned period numbered more than 11,000. Many of them were not returned.

The spread of illicit firearms in Sri Lanka can be attributed to several key factors, according to researchers; they include gunrunning, illegal operations carried out by rogue elements in the police and the armed forces, local arms manufacturing, and criminals gaining access to arms caches of the LTTE. It may be recalled that the Colombo Crime Division produced 12 suspects before the Colombo Chief Magistrate on March 22, 2019, for having supplied weapons retrieved from some buried LTTE arms caches in Kilinochchi to criminal gangs elsewhere.

The National Commission against the Proliferation of Illicit Small Arms, established by President Chandrika Bandaranaike Kumaratunga in 2004, dealt extensively with the issue of illegal weapons in circulation in Sri Lanka, as we pointed out in a previous editorial comment. Its survey report contains valuable information, which, however, needs to be updated. Defence authorities should study this document thoroughly and commission a fresh survey on illicit firearms while carrying out operations to neutralise criminal gangs and seize lethal weapons in their possession.

The police must go all out to find the illegal firearms used by the JVP during its second uprising (1987-89). Most of the JVP’s arms caches have not been traced. SJB MP Dayasiri Jayasekara told Parliament on 27 February 2025 that more than 2,000 illegal firearms looted by the JVP between 1987 and 1989 had gone missing. One may recall that the JVP attacked several police stations and military camps and grabbed weapons. In April 1987, it seized the arsenal of the Pallekele army camp. Now that the JVP-led NPP has formed a government and launched a campaign to eliminate gun violence, the Defence Ministry may be able to ascertain information about the firearms used by the JVP in the late 1980s.

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.