A visit to Barbados and experiences as Secretary to Education Ministry

On October 24, 1990, the Minister and I along with a couple of other senior officials left to attend the Commonwealth Education Ministers Conference in Barbados, in the West Indies. This was a part of the world that we normally do not get to visit. An added point of interest for me was that it was also a cricket-playing country. The Minister and we were put up in two different hotels. Barbados was tropical, and during the time we were there quite humid. Many of the hotels were sited near the sea, and commanded a pleasant view.

The conference itself which went on for around three and a half days proved to be quite interesting. The collegial, clubby air of Commonwealth Conferences, which I witnessed at the Commonwealth Agriculture Ministers’ Conference in Rome was in even more evidence here. The Education Ministers were an articulate lot who enlivened the debate with good humour and amusing anecdotes. Attendance at ministerial level was quite high. There were also interesting occurrences.

The British Minister had just landed in Barbados when he received an urgent message to come back home because of a crucial vote in the House of Commons. So he did the complete round trip without really coming into town. India was in the midst of an acute political crisis during this time. It was apparently so grave that she could not spare anyone at the political level or for that matter even at the senior administrative level to attend the conference.

Their delegation was led therefore by a young administrator at joint Secretary level, a level below that of even an aAditional Secretary. As leader of the delegation, he sat in the main seat meant for the Indian Minister, in plenary sessions. If the Indian administrative service was to be judged by him, it was evident that it was a machine of high quality. He conducted himself with dignity, confidence and aplomb, and intervened in the discussions and debates, judiciously, relevantly and elegantly.

During the conference, Mr. Athulathmudali’s efforts led to Sri Lanka obtaining a seat on the Board of Directors of “The Commonwealth of Learning,” based in Vancouver, Canada which was the distance learning institution within the Commonwealth. Apart from the experience of participating and sharing views on a number of topics with other colleagues in the Commonwealth, the conference also turned out a number of reports and other publications of great value. Some of the longer publications, I read after I returned home.

We along with some of the delegates also found the time to sneak in to the oval at Bridgetown to watch a cricket match for about an hour, between two West Indian sides. This happened to be one of the trial matches organized in order to select the West Indian team for a tour of Pakistan. The most interesting thing that struck us was that the surroundings were very familiar. In fact, they were very close to the environment outside the Oval in Colombo.

The end of the year saw the Presidential Mobile Service held in Hambantota. The year 1991 dawned with the free school book-distribution ceremony held at the Kahawatte Madya Maha Vidyalaya during the third week of January. When I reviewed the arrangements for the occasion, I discovered to my surprise that over a thousand children who were to be brought for the ceremony and the teachers accompanying them were not going to have any shelter. They were to be seated in the open, a complete prey to the vagaries of the weather.

I was quite appalled at this. Further inquiries elicited the fact that this was how it was done previously. The reason given was, that it was very expensive to construct temporary shelter for them! Further discussions revealed, that it had rained during the previous ceremony and the teachers and children had got wet. No wonder there was such an adverse public perception of the Ministry! I was really angered by this situation. I told my officers that the children did not attend these ceremonies voluntarily. They were bused in from the early hours of the morning, because the VIPs wished to have a large crowd present. They were our guests, and it was quite reprehensible that guests were treated with such callousness and disdain.

We had also quite forgotten the fact that the Ministry existed for the welfare of the children. I concluded by stating that if children are to be brought in, we should put them under cover, whatever the cost. I undertook to speak to the Minister about this. I had no problems with the Minister who agreed with me entirely. So for the first time, a large temporary shed was put up which gave the teachers and children shade and protection.

At Kahawatte, several people, including some politicians expressed their appreciation to me, including I remember Deputy Minister Mr. Aboosally who with great feeling told me “Pieris, I am very happy you have done this. Previously, children were treated like cattle.”

Under Mr. Athulathmudali’s leadership, the Ministry became much more proactive. The Minister took decisions on extending school hours in order to accommodate more English language classes. Programmes for remedial teaching were drawn up. Negotiations took place with the ADB and World Bank on concessionary assistance for programmes of educational development. A Ministry mobile service was commenced starting with Anuradhapura, for which a team of senior officials including myself went in a chartered bus leaving “Isurupaya” at 5 a.m.

Regular meetings were held with Provincial Ministers of Education and Provincial Directors, both meetings being chaired by the Minister himself. The American Peace Corps and the Japan International Co-operation Agency provided teachers in areas where we were lacking. The Peace Corps concentrated on providing English teachers. An interesting point here was how quickly the American and Japanese volunteers were able to function in Sinhala. Much to my surprise, when J.I.C.A. volunteers called on me, before assuming duties they inquired whether they could converse with me in Sinhala, abandoning thereby any continuation of the conversation in English.

They had all received Sinhala language training before their departure from Japan. The American Peace Corps had a more interesting system by which volunteers lived with temporary Sinhala foster parents. Households were deliberately selected where very little English, if at all were spoken. After three months, these volunteers made an excellent presentation in Sinhala at their formal induction ceremony, before they were posted out to different parts of the country.

I remember the delightful presentation made jointly by two young Peace Corps girls, both elegantly dressed in scree, at their induction ceremony. They said, in their very listenable and even cutely accented Sinhala which brought a smile to your lips, that when they settled down in their temporary home, given the warm weather, they promptly changed into very short pairs of shorts. When they came out their ‘mother’, saw them and said “chee, why are you dressed like this? You are not tourists. You are teachers,” whereupon they promptly went into their room and wore long dresses! (diga gawuma).

It is not possible to relate everything that was being done in a Ministry now humming with activity. What I have attempted is to give a brief impression. In areas under my direct purview too, I made amendments and changes to existing practice when I thought them to be relevant. I instituted a regular meeting with the Principals of National Schools. Out of about 10,300 schools in the island around 100 were at that time National Schools which came under the direct supervision of the Ministry. The balance came within the purview of Provincial Councils.

Among the National Schools were many prestigious ones such as Royal College, Ananda, Nalanda, D.S., Visakha Vidyalaya, Sirimavo Bandaranaike Vidyalaya, Devi Balika, and many schools out of Colombo such as Mahamaya and Dharmaraja in Kandy; Maliyadewa in Kurunegala; Richmond, Mahinda, Sanghamitta in Galle, and so on.

Again, at my first meeting with these Principals, I was somewhat taken aback at the speed at which they sprang to their feet on seeing me. The comparison that came to mind was that of a junior class, when the principal entered the room. I gradually got them to realize that what was best was mutual respect, and not exaggerated deference towards the Secretary. We continued to have interesting and productive discussions on numerous matters. We found the forum to be mutually useful both from a point of view of getting ourselves briefed and up to date, and also as an instrument for clearing doubts and resolving issues.

Another initiative I took during this time, was to inaugurate a periodic joint meeting between the Governing Council of the National Institute of Education and its Academic Affairs Board. This meeting helped Council members to understand details, even technical issues relating to curriculum development and other matters, and for members of the Academic Affairs Board to appreciate better the policy concerns of the Council. This became a meeting both sides looked forward to. There was the additional incentive of an excellent lunch served by the NIE after the meeting.

Among the many calls on the Secretary’s time were invitations to preside at school prize-givings and to deliver keynote addresses at various seminars, colloquiums and so on. The prize givings I steadfastly avoided, in spite of many appeals from principals of schools. I just could not spare the time for these more ceremonial occasions which took the better part of a late afternoon and early evening. During my entire stay in Education, at different times, I presided over only three school prize-givings. One was St. Bridget’s Convent, where on a request made by Professor G.L. Peiris, I stood in for him, since he could not make it at almost the last moment.

The next was St. Joseph’s College, Colombo, in which school also, I was a past pupil. It Was the College Year of the school and its 93rd prize-giving and the Father Rector Dr. Abeysekera personally saw me at “Isurupaya” to urge acceptance on me. The other one was Mahanama Vidyalaya, where the principal, Mr. Ratnadasa both a batch mate and hall mate of mine at Marrs Hall, University of Ceylon, Peradeniya was not prepared to take no for an answer.

As for keynote addresses, Education had rather more of them than other Ministries I had worked in. Many seminars were held either sponsored by, or with the participation of reputed international agencies and making the keynote address at some of these was virtually obligatory. In my case, since I disliked reading from a prepared text, I could not get others to write drafts of speeches for me. I had to study the material and the occasion and then decide what to say.

(Excerpted from In Pursuit of Governance, autobiography of MDD Pieris)

Founding of the Federal Party, the B-C Pact, Dudley-Chelva Pact Constituent Assembly and Vadukoddai Resolution

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.