Expert says breakdown of human relationships and societal isolation contributing to rise in suicides

The breakdown of human relationships and the increased isolation of individuals in modern society are significant contributors to rising suicide rates, says Prof. Mohamed Mahees of the Department of Sociology at the University of Colombo.

Speaking during Ada Derana’s current affairs programme “Big Focus” on Wednesday (09), he highlighted the growing detachment of people from one another as a pressing concern.

Prof. Mahees pointed out that modern humans often prioritize their interactions with technology over meaningful relationships with others, which he believes is a root cause of this growing disconnection.

“We see that most suicides are reported in developed countries, but Sri Lanka is not one of those. Despite this, the breakdown of human relationships and the isolation of people in society are major factors here as well,” he explained.

Furthermore, he emphasized the need for individuals to reconnect with themselves and others to rebuild stronger relationships stating, “We don’t fully understand ourselves or others. To address this, we need to revisit our values and embrace a deeper passion for life…The main reason for this is the collapse of human desires, ambitions and unfulfillment of hopes; living with great desires beyond necessity.”

Quoting poet Rudyard Kipling, he added, “It doesn’t matter if you lose everything you have; don’t lose your passion for life. If you have that, you can regain everything.”

Prof. Mahees also commented on the role of economic hardships in worsening societal isolation. “With the recent economic challenges in the country, we see people unable to adapt, choosing to leave instead. This indicates deficiencies in our sense of humanity. However, we have solutions all around us — through nature, art, religion, and our environment.”

Highlighting the dangers of advanced technology, Prof. Mahees said that mobile phone use is more dangerous than a ‘T-56’ firearm, as it fosters a new form of isolation.

“People are now alone among people. In the past, we maintained connections with our families, village elders, and nature. Today, we see the individual increasingly isolated, immersed in their phones rather than interacting with those around them,” he said.

Prof. Mahees called for society to re-evaluate its values and priorities to address this alarming trend and prevent further isolation and disconnection in communities.

If you or someone you know is in crisis and needs help, resources are available for immediate support: