‘Union Bank Elite Circle’ redefines personalised banking

Union Bank recently relaunched its private banking proposition, ‘Union Bank Elite Circle,’ with a selection of new features tailored to its customers’ specific needs. The most recent transformation enhances its bespoke service and tailored financial solutions, providing customers with a world of privileges and luxuries for an exclusive banking experience. The Bank recently launched a campaign theme “The Finer Things in Life Should Extend to Your Banking,” with the goal of raising awareness about the newly enhanced product.

A team of dedicated relationship managers ensures a seamless banking experience with a wide range of financial solutions and services ranging from personalised banking and wealth management to expert advisory, reinforcing the hallmarks of personalised service. The exclusive Union Bank Elite Circle Centre, located in the heart of Colombo and the dedicated exclusive spaces across the branch network provides maximum convenience to its members.

Becoming a member gives you access to special pricings & value-added services including, preferential Interest rates on investments and loans, preferential tariffs, special rates for safety deposit lockers, insurance solutions as well as access to emergency funding options on investments and much more.

Chaya Jayawardane, Senior Vice President Retail Banking, said, “Union Bank’s Elite Circle is a banking proposition that is designed to understand the distinctive needs of an exclusive clientele.

Whilst highlighting the Bank’s focus on further enhancing service levels, the newly upgraded Union Bank Elite Circle redefines the personalised banking experience placing even greater emphasis on customer relationship management combined with customized financial solutions”.

People’s Bank, one of the most awarded Sri Lankan banks in 2023

CG Capital Partners Global acquires indirect majority stake in Union Bank

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.