Water sources polluted with human waste, contained constituents unfit for human consumption

Colombo, June 5 (Daily Mirror) - Laboratory tests carried out by the health authorities have revealed that the spread of Meningitis in the Deniyaya area recently was due to the use of polluted water. It has been revealed that the people in the affected area depend on natural water resources including fountains and the community water supplies to meet their requirements of drinking water. Laboratory tests have established that these water resources are polluted with human waste and contained constituents unfit for human consumption.

Public Health Inspector in Pallegama North in Deniyaya, Kasun Amarasekara pointed out that the water from natural water resources and the community water tanks used by the people, contained human waste. He said the health authorities had made proposals for several years to resolve this issue but they have been brushed under the carpet with the change of governments.

Meanwhile, a spokesman for the education sector in the area said the health authorities have informed all schools not to use water from fountains and streams and the community water services. They have informed that these water sources contained constituents unfit for human consumption.

The disease was first reported from the Deniyaya in the Matara district in April and has now spread to Nuwara Eliya, Kandy and Badulla districts as well. The Epidemiological Unit said 237 patients suspected as Meningitis positive have been reported.

Meanwhile, when the situation worsened, it resulted in the closure of schools in the Deniyaya area for several days. Public Health Inspector Kasuna Amarasekara said human waste and other waste matter drifted away by storm water during the rainy season resulted in pollution of drinking water sources and that the laboratory tests of samples of water established it. The people in the Deniyaya area depend mostly on community water services and natural water resources for their requirements of drinking water. Although water is supplied by the National Water Supply and Drainage Board to schools in the urban areas, rural schools depend on community water services and the natural water sources.

The PHI further said that they have made proposals to resolve this issue for sometime but to no avail.

A spokesman for a leading school in the Deniyaya area said samples of water are collected and subjected to laboratory tests once a month. However, he said the schools do not receive these reports. He said fountains and streams in the area are polluted and that steps have been taken to supply water to the schools in the area only from the NWSDB and wells.

Chairman of Kotapola Pradeshiya Sabha Chaminda Gunasekara said the health authorities have taken steps to control the spread of Meningitis in the area. He pointed tout that the public depended on three main sources of water including the water supply of the NWSDB, the community water supply projects and the water supply of the Pradeshiya Sabha. He said the Pradeshiiya Sabha had implemented a programme earlier to create public awareness on chlorinating water.

He pointed out that the people have been in the habit of tapping water from fountains and streams through pipes and that the samples of water collected from these water sources have shown that these are polluted with waste matter including human waste and that it resulted in the spread of Meningitis in the area. The Chairman said the situation is being closely monitored to create awareness among the public. .He further said steps would be taken to resolve water pollution in the area soon.

Meanwhile, health authorities have warned on the possibility of contracting the disease through polluted water, unwholesome food, breath and unclean hands. They have informed schools to immediately refer any student who develops fever, stiffness of the neck,, convulsion, and restlessness to the medical authorities.

The Ministry of Education has informed schools to strictly adhere to the sanitary guidelines including washing of hands, use of safe water, constant cleaning of toilets, maintaining clean air in class rooms and avoiding individuals with any of the meningitis symptoms.