President to launch Rs. 7.1 Bn hospital development projects in four districts

Colombo, Sep. 14 (Daily Mirror) - Foundation stones will be laid for four major hospital development projects worth a total of Rs. 7,148 million in Anuradhapura, Trincomalee, Mannar and Mullaittivu, under the patronage of President Anura Kumara Dissanayake on September 16.

The projects, aimed at expanding specialised healthcare services in the Northern, North Central and Eastern provinces, are being implemented with loan assistance from the Japan International Cooperation Agency (JICA) and grant assistance from the Government of India.

The projects include an eight-storey cardiac care complex at the Anuradhapura Teaching Hospital at a cost of Rs. 3,545 million and another eight-storey cardiac care complex at the Trincomalee District General Hospital at a cost of Rs. 2,403 million.

An ultramodern emergency, accident and critical care complex costing Rs. 600 million will also be constructed at the Mannar District General Hospital, while a four-storey ward complex costing Rs. 600 million will be built at the Mullaittivu District General Hospital.

The Anuradhapura and Trincomalee cardiac care complexes, funded through JICA loans, will be equipped with modern facilities for the diagnosis and treatment of heart disease, including intensive and coronary care units, catheterisation laboratories, wards, clinics, laboratories, X-ray and ECG facilities, as well as libraries and auditoriums.

JICA Sri Lanka Chief Representative Shigeo Honzu and Japanese Ambassador to Sri Lanka Akio Isomata are scheduled to attend the foundation stone-laying ceremonies.

The Mannar complex will include emergency, accident and trauma treatment facilities, while the new ward complex in Mullaittivu is intended to ease overcrowding and improve patient care.

The Mannar and Mullaittivu projects are being implemented with Rs. 1,200 million in Indian grant assistance. Indian High Commissioner to Sri Lanka Santosh Jha is also scheduled to attend the ceremonies.