Cabinet approves Rs. 800 m equity injection for Lanka Metro Transit

Grants additional Rs.267.5 m equity capital for company’s operations in 2027

The Cabinet of Ministers has approved an equity capital allocation of Rs. 800 million to Lanka Metro Transit Ltd., to develop infrastructure required to expand modern public transport operations in Colombo and surrounding areas.

In addition, the Cabinet approved Rs. 267.5 million in equity capital for the company’s operations in 2027, indicating that the Government views the pilot as a viable model for wider urban transport operations.

Lanka Metro Transit Ltd., was incorporated on 3 October 2025, as a subsidiary of the Sri Lanka Transport Board (SLTB) under the Companies Act No. 7 of 2007, with the objective of supporting the modernisation of Sri Lanka’s public transport system.

The company has already commenced a Colombo Urban Transport Pilot Operation, using 10 low-floor buses purchased with funding allocated under the Clean Sri Lanka Program.

According to the Government, the pilot operation has demonstrated both the commercial feasibility and public acceptance of the service, prompting the company to expand its operations.

As part of the planned expansion, 112 additional low-floor buses are scheduled to be introduced in September, significantly increasing the scale of the modern bus service.

However, the expansion has also highlighted the need for supporting infrastructure to ensure that the new fleet can be operated efficiently and systematically.

The proposed infrastructure development includes the construction of a fully equipped central workshop, as well as modern bus depots at Thalangama, Kadawatha, Ratmalana and Homagama. The programme will also include improvements to internal roads and the construction and development of bus stands.

“The Government seeks to move towards a more modern and efficient public transport system, with low-floor buses potentially improving accessibility, passenger comfort and operational standards,” Cabinet Spokesman and Minister Dr. Nalinda Jayatissa said at the weekly post-Cabinet meeting media briefing yesterday.

He said the investment therefore combines funding for both long-term infrastructure development and future operational requirements, as Lanka Metro Transit moves from a limited pilot project towards a larger-scale urban public transport service.

The proposal to this effect was submitted by Transport, Highways and Urban Development Minister Bimal Rathnayake.