2024 New Generation Asian Conference and Awards in July

With a burst of youthful energy and inspiration, New Generation Sri Lanka has set the stage for the much-anticipated New Generation Asian Conference and the fifth New Generation Asian Awards in Colombo from 5 to 8 July.

This year’s gathering aims to bring together around 200 young leaders from across the continent.

New Generation Sri Lanka Chairman Kasun Sigera said: “This year, we wanted to make New Generation a platform that goes beyond just awards. Over the past four years, we have recognised over 500 exceptional youth, including myself. It is time for Sri Lankan youth to step out of their comfort zones and network with the fastest-growing youth communities in Asia.”

Nominations for the awards are now open until 31 May. Young individuals between the ages of 15 to 30, known for their academic prowess, leadership, and potential to influence the political, economic, and social spheres, are encouraged to apply. Chair of the Panel of Judges and a seasoned observer of the event’s growth Prof. Ravi Dissanayake, reflected on the importance of the awards: “We are looking for young individuals who are not only academically accomplished but also those who exhibit extraordinary drive and the potential to impact the political, economic, and social systems,” he added.

The conference and awards, organised in collaboration with the National Youth Services Council, have been pivotal in highlighting the talents of Asia’s youth.

National Youth Service Council Chairman Pasindu Gunaratne said: “NYSC is happy to partner for the fifth consecutive year with the New Generation Asian Awards. As the national organisation for youth, we believe in private-public partnerships for the empowerment of our youth. This is a great platform for youth in rural areas to be highlighted and engaged with the private sector, which is much needed for Sri Lanka.”

In addition to celebrating youthful achievements, the WINSPIRATION Mentorship Program will offer insights into the European job and entrepreneurship markets.

New Generation Sri Lanka Founder Dr. Sulochana Segera said: “We want youth to think beyond volunteering, and focus on investing in their personal growth. The conference will equip them with the necessary attitudes, skills, and networks to seek opportunities beyond traditional marketplaces.”

For those eager to be part of this transformative experience, visit the official New Generation website for more details on nominations and event information. https://womeninmanagementawards.org/winspiration-3-0/

New Generation Sri Lanka Office : 011 4886811/14 Hotline : 0772307356