Dry spell hits some parts of Sri Lanka, water level drops in major tanks

Colombo, Aug. 18 (Daily Mirror) - A dry spell in the Northern, Eastern and North Central provinces, as well as some areas of the Hambantota District, is reported, leading to water storage in more than 30 reservoirs and rivers falling to less than 50 per cent of their total capacity.

Families in Mihintale, Polonnaruwa and the Hambantota District are seriously affected by the dry spell in the respective areas. Cattle in Hambantota are without water, reports said.

Water storage in more than 30 minor reservoirs was less than 30 per cent of their capacity. Water storage in Egal Oya, Namal Oya, Pallan Oya, Pannalgama Oya and Rambakan Oya in the Ampara District was less than 50 per cent, according to data released by the Department of Irrigation.

Storage in Hurulu Wewa, Mahakanadarawa and Nachchaduwa in the Anuradhapura District; Navakiri, Vakaneri and Unnichchai rivers in the Batticaloa District; Mau Ara, Muruthuhawela and Veheragala in the Hambantota District; Giritale, Kavudulla and Minneriya in Polonnaruwa; Tabbowa in the Puttalam District; Vendrasan in Trincomalee; and Paravakulam River, Giant Tank and Viyathukulam rivers in Mannar were also reported to be less than 50 per cent.

Department of Irrigation Director H. M. P. S. D. Herath told the Daily Mirror that there is no issue with the major tanks, as water can be supplied for drinking purposes and cultivation until October this year. He therefore said there could be an uncertain period after October. “There are some drinking water shortages in rural villages which do not depend on major tanks and reservoirs,” he said.

National Water Resources and Drainage Board Chairman Chandana Bandara told the media that the water situation is somewhat stable at the moment, but there could be a crisis by February next year. “We have begun planning to face the crisis, and a programme will be introduced to face a crisis,” he said.

Meanwhile, Chairman of the Caucus on Climate Parliament Sajith Premadasa told state authorities who were summoned to a meeting recently that it is time to come up with a national-level programme to face the El Niño situation and the expected dry spell. “It is essential to talk to all stakeholders, including the farmers and come up with a national-level programme to face the situation. Anticipatory crisis governance policy is essential,” he said. Mr. Premadasa said it is also essential to make a payment to the farmers in the event the use of water in certain reservoirs is prohibited.

However, showers were reported in some areas in the Kegalle and Ratnapura Districts yesterday. The highest rainfall of 33.5mm was recorded in Lakshakanda in the Ratnapura District. A rainfall of 25.3mm was recorded in Warakapola in the Kegalle District. A rainfall of 17mm was reported from Kukuleganga in the Kalutara District.

Yala strengthens water supply for wildlife due to dry weather