Buddhism, Spirituality and Science

Some 800 km East of Bhutan is the city of Varanasi in India. In the 2566th year of the Buddhist era, human beings – members of the species Homo sapiens sapiens – total some eight billion individuals and still increasing. There is an estimated total of over two million separate species of animals, plants and microorganisms, with humans evidently poised at the pinnacle of evolution, on a planet that is 4.500 million years old. Today humans comprise a species ill at ease with itself, uncertain of its place and role in the scheme of things. Evidence of our cave dwelling ancestors date back to over two million years and our stone-age ancestors nearly 12,000 years ago.

An impressive recorded history of art, culture and civilization associated with modern man stretches over at least 5,000 years. Yet the past 100 years have seen the most dramatic changes in the entire history and destiny of our species. Alongside the acquisition of scientific knowledge and the explosion of technology on a grand scale, there has been a steady moral decline and decay which appears to continue unabated. The decline has a profound effect on the well-being of the planet itself. The Earth’s scarce resources of energy are being squandered, and its environment polluted in ways that threaten the very integrity of the planet.

The unbridled greed of the richer nations to amass a disproportionate share of the planet’s resources is leading to a situation where the inequality between rich and poor continues to rise. The number of people living close to starvation is reckoned, not in tens or hundreds of millions, but closer to several billion, and this number continues to grow. International aid projects are patronizingly conceived to pay lip service to “compassion” and to assuage the consciences of the rich, but the underlying causes of inequities are scarcely touched.

In the developed world, perhaps the most dramatic changes to the human condition have followed the weakening and virtual collapse of the social unit we call the family; a social unit that had served our ancestors exceedingly well for millions of years. Billions of humans are now left wandering hither and thither on the surface of a threatened planet like a disturbed swarm of bees, bewildered and without any sense of moral purpose.

Evidence to justify this grim caricature of ourselves can be seen everywhere. On a Friday or Saturday night in most of the major cities of the UK (for instance) one could see all the signs of a civilization in decline. Binge drinking in public houses and bars overflows into the streets in the form of disorderly conduct, even senseless murders – a pattern of behavior unmistakably symptomatic of a social system in the throes of decay.

Newspapers and the media the world over are full of stories of gratuitous violence at all levels. From strife within small social groups at the lower end of the scale to a simmering discord between nations that might eventually engulf the entire world in war. We are being constantly reminded of the horrors of international terrorism whenever we travel and pass through ever-more stringent security checks at our airports and seaports.

Against this grotesque backdrop of insecurity it is not too difficult to convince oneself that we are perilously close to self-destruction. Disaster could strike within a matter of a few years or decades unless measures can be devised to avoid it. And destruction, if it does come, will not be restricted to the humans; rather would it threaten the extermination of all life on the planet.

The long-term survival of humanity must be contingent upon the emergence in the very near future of a collective sense of sanity and group preservation – an Enlightenment. Whether this can be seen as an extension of the Darwinian process of natural selection, the struggle and instinct for survival, for which there is an evolutionary imperative, is left to be seen. As individuals we are unquestionably endowed with an instinct for self-preservation, but in the larger demographic groups of the modern world such an instinct appears to have become increasingly insignificant.

Natural biological survival instinct at an individual level may have to be replaced by a self-preserving philosophy of life embodying some form of moral code. Perhaps this can come from the emergence of AI (artificial intelligence) which seems to be emerging as an ever more powerful factor in controlling human behavior.

For centuries in Western Europe moral and ethical values were provided by Christianity that proved to be a powerful civilizing force. Even though such ethical principles failed to prevent the recurrence of wars and conflicts, they were adequate to secure happiness for individuals in society, maintain the cohesion of social units, and to ensure the survival of mankind. With the rising tide of secularism in the latter half of the 20th century, the influence of Christianity as a moral force for good began to wane, leaving a moral vacuum in a society that is now the poorer for its loss.

All this has happened against the backdrop of a unique empowerment of our species through advances in science. In a brief interlude of a hundred years the world has witnessed a technological revolution that has seen no parallel in the past. The atom was smashed in the 1930’s unleashing the formidable power of nuclear energy. The blue print of life – DNA – was discovered in the 1950’s, heralding the birth of biotechnology.

Space science and astronomy have advanced enormously in the past two decades with the development of a new generation of telescopes and instruments. The solar system has been thoroughly explored using space vehicles and spacecraft. Orbiting space telescopes like the Hubble telescope have unraveled the minutest details of astronomical processes that are taking place in the most distant galaxies. The Kepler telescope launched in 2009 have revealed the existence of many million habitable (Earth-like) planets in our galaxy alone.

In the past year evidence of life on an exoplanet over 100 light years away has been discovered. The origin of most of the matter in the visible universe had been thought to be traced to an explosive Big Bang – type event that occurred nearly 13.8 billion years ago. But this point of view has been challenged months ago after the discovery of galaxies much further away – far, far too close to the Big Bang itself.

We have understood the processes by which life arrived at the Earth, and spreads through the Universe, although the precise processes that led to the emergence of the first life in the Universe is still obscure. Maybe life and the Universe were always there, and there was no beginning or act of creation. This is what was stated in Buddhist scriptures of 2,500 years ago. It is becoming increasingly clear that life, even intelligent life, could be ubiquitous in the galaxy.

Computers, the internet, and mobile phones have transformed the lives of every inhabitant of our planet. Recently scientists have engineered a bacterium from synthetically constructed stretches of DNA. We are at the threshold of creating new forms of life in the laboratory, or for that matter lethal microbes that could kill an entire species at will. It is all too obvious that the fruits of modern science could be harnessed for good or for evil. Today bioterrorism and nuclear weapons in the possession of rogue states pose the greatest threat to the security of nations.

In the crisis that faces us it is perhaps no surprise to find more and more people in the West turning for solace to Eastern philosophies, philosophies in which peace and compassion are accorded pride of place. Buddhism is a supreme example in this category.

Buddhism has an immediate appeal to the intellect. It seeks solutions to the problems of the world by trying to understand their causes at a deep and fundamental level. Solutions are sought mainly by a process of meditation and self-analysis. Such a procedure might be expected to lead to the transference of interest in oneself and self-preservation to the benefit of larger groups. A deep concern for one’s own inner peace and tranquility could be quickly transformed into an equal concern for all mankind or even for all living things. So arises the Buddhist refrain, May all living beings be happy!

In its original form Buddhism may be seen as a pragmatic philosophy worked out by an Indian Prince Siddharta Gautama 2,554 years ago. As a royal prince, married and with a young son, he had enjoyed all the regal comforts that befitted his station. But such privileges did not make him blind to the intensity of human suffering that he witnessed all around him.

One day, at the age of 29, riding in his chariot in the royal gardens, he is said to have witnessed four sights: a decrepit old man leaning on a stick and shaking all over, a sick man, a corpse and finally a monk in calm repose. He began to ask questions about what he saw, but he could not find answers that satisfied him. He was so deeply moved by what he saw that he rode out at night to renounce all worldly pleasures and to lead the life of an ascetic. For six years he tried many forms of asceticism, including self-mortification and fasting, but to no avail. Finally he retreated to meditate under the shade of the sacred Bo-tree, seeking to discover his own solution to the problems of life, disease, suffering and death. His eventual enlightenment came after 49 days, after which he came to be known as Gautama, the Buddha – the enlightened One.

The philosophy that emerged from this enlightenment was at once simple and profound. lt touched upon all aspects of life, the cause of suffering and the nature of human relationships as well as the nature of the world in which we live. It was as all-embracing and comprehensive as any philosophy could be. An important point to note is that this enlightenment was not regarded by Gautama Buddha as a miraculous event or one that involved communication with an external divine agent.

It is presented as a state of mind at peace with the world from which objective knowledge flows naturally. It is a condition that every single human being could aspire to and reach to varying degrees in his or her own lifetime. For the remainder of Gautama’s life until his death at the age of 80 he travelled widely in Northern India preaching his doctrines and making millions of converts to his point of view.

(Vidya Jyothi Prof Chandra Wickramasinghe, MBE, MA, PhD, ScD (Cantab) is an internationally renowned Sri Lankan-British astronomer. Former Fellow of Jesus College, Cambridge, former Professor at Cardiff University, Honorary Professor University of Buckingham UK, Ruhuna University and National Institute of Fundamental Studies Sri Lanka)

HSBC Ceylon Literary and Arts Festival Opens with Call to Inspire a New Generation

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.