McLarens Lubricants wins ‘Best Customer-Centric Supplier’ award

From left: Chatura Kaththriarachchi – Senior Manager Business Development, Upul Somaratne – General Manager Sales , Chaminda Gunarathne – Jt. Managing Director, Automobile Association representatives and Lahiru De Thabrew – Senior Manager Marketing.

McLarens Lubricants Limited has been recognized as the Best Customer-Centric Supplier at the Automobile Industry Awards 2026, organized by the Automobile Industry Council of Sri Lanka.

McLarens Lubricants received the accolade under the Supply Chain Industry category, reaffirming its commitment to delivering exceptional value, service excellence, and long-term partnerships across Sri Lanka’s automotive sector.

With over 25 years of operations in Sri Lanka, McLarens Lubricants Limited has built a strong reputation for providing world-class lubrication and automotive solutions. McLarens Lubricants Limited represents globally popular brands including Mobil, recognized as the world’s leading synthetic lubricant, and Lockheed Brake Fluids, a brand that has earned the trust of generations of Sri Lankan motorists.

The award recognizes McLarens Lubricants’ unwavering focus on understanding customer needs, delivering superior products and services, and fostering lasting relationships with customers, distributors, workshops, and industry stakeholders. It also reflects the company’s continued investment in operational excellence, innovation, and service quality, enabling it to consistently exceed customer expectations.

Commenting on the achievement, Chaminda Gunerathne, Joint Managing Director of McLarens Lubricants Limited said, “Winning the Best Customer-Centric Supplier Award is a significant milestone for our team and a testament to the trust our customers and partners have placed in us over 25 years. At McLarens Lubricants, customer-centricity is at the heart of everything we do. We remain committed to delivering world-class products, exceptional service, and innovative solutions that create lasting value for our customers while strengthening Sri Lanka’s automotive industry.”