PM calls for immediate end to collecting money from parents at school level

The Education Ministry has begun distributing smart boards required for the new education reform to schools and has called for an immediate end to collecting money from parents at the school level, while no decision has been taken to cut free education or close the Jayewardenepura Dental Faculty, Prime Minister Dr. Harini Amarasuriya said.

The Prime Minister said this in response to a question asked by Opposition Leader Sajith Premadasa in Parliament last week.

Dr. Amarasuriya, further expressing her views, said: “Although free education is not the policy of the Opposition Leader, I am happy that he is standing up for it at this time. But I request that questions in Parliament not be based on social media or other rumours. We have not taken any decision to curtail free education or close the Jayewardenepura Dental Faculty.

“The Wickramarachchi Medical Faculty has been started without any formality and various courses have been introduced. Therefore, those children have been left helpless. We are taking the necessary steps in this regard. It is not a political decision. We are acting according to a report given by the expert committee appointed regarding the issue of the Wickramarachchi Medical Faculty.

“This year, we are working to distribute the smart boards needed by the school system. There is no need to collect money from parents in any way. If you are collecting money, stop it immediately. The Education Ministry Secretary has already issued an order not to collect money in schools.

“We do not teach a separate subject called Information Technology for grades 1-5. However, to move forward with the global technological world, we have initiated a dialogue based on expert advice to provide technological understanding appropriate to each age group. We make decisions based on child protection and expert advice. We do not make political decisions about the curriculum. Those decisions are made by experts in that subject.

“Considering the requests of universities and higher education institutions, the relevant universities and higher education institutions are currently working on recruiting academic staff for essential vacancies with the approval of the Cabinet.

“Also, even after 30 years since the establishment of the teaching service, there are further steps that need to be taken to develop the quality of the teaching service. The Government’s attention has now been focused on preparing a formal program for quality education by resolving the practical problems in the evaluation process for promotions in the teaching service and the issues that have arisen due to the fact that recruitment is not carried out in accordance with the service constitution and other issues.”

The Prime Minister added: “Various programs have been introduced based on Government policy decisions to meet the basic needs of school children. In addition, school textbooks, uniforms, and health insurance coverage have been provided. Further, vouchers have been provided to purchase sanitary napkins for girls in grades 6-13. Midday meals have been provided to children in primary schools. Financial assistance has been provided to children who are unable to obtain scholarships. The Education Ministry is collecting the necessary information to expand this further and is taking relevant measures.”