Vesak-poya, Thoughts II – Meditation- an acquired Skill

The best seller book, ‘The Selfish Gene’, by Richard Dawkins revolutionized evolutionary biology by shifting the perspective of survival, from organism-centered to gene-centered, long-term survival of genetic information. Survival and reproduction, hence remains the core driving force for natural selection-adapting to the environment, in evolution of all life-forms.

Survival is the key for all life-forms, including humans. In Buddhist phrenology- (terms)- ‘Bhava-Tanha’. It is a natural Force. Could it be, if Samsara exists – natures mechanism to keep life-forms on Earth, or projected further, in the Universe! Survival entails acts of Kamma. Intrusion into your personal space (inclusive of ‘I’ or narrative me – (i.e. reputation, achievements) or that of family or tribal space etc., would provoke in the untrained human Mind, reactions -intentions (Cetana) – creating unwholesome Kamma. It could be argued that, that Kammic-Force, which through Dependent–Origination (Paticca-Samuppada), is nature’s way of sustaining life-forms in the Universe – ie. sustains Samsara.

Humans are accustomed to introspection-ruminating on past ‘baggage’, memories etc., in most of their free moments. Functional Magnetic Imaging (fMRI), scans show the Default Mode Network (DMN), is the major neuronal network (See Fig: across), wherein in which much of DMN activity occurs. In contrast the Task based network, the Central Executive Network, is activated in living in the ‘now’. Mindfulness Meditation is in the latter category. Persistent, prolonged meditation has been shown to suppress the DMN. Making the Mind transcend from a mere State to a Trait.

The Buddha, enunciated the four noble truths – as life being unsatisfactory, its cause – and way to cease being reborn in Samsara. This path enunciates improving the quality of one’s mind. The Buddha encouraged his monk-disciples to achieve this trait by deep, persistent and prolonged open (Vipassana) meditation.

Vipassana (Open) -Meditation is a skill that can be acquired by diligent practice. Eastern civilizations have recognized its benefits from times of yore. Though monks are customarily expected to practice this skill, lay-society too could reap its benefits.

Hopefully in the future, humans would realize what mental peace is. Avoids the madness that is now going on in the world stage driven by egoism, backed by the armament industry. The goal is achieving the quality of the human mind, that transcends reaction to emotion, cultivates well-being, resilience and happiness.

Some in western society, have realized the worth of ‘Contemplative Science-meditation as a useful tool to reduce stress related issues in their Corporate Sector. Meditation Based Stress Reduction (MBSR) programs abound in their Psychiatric Clinics. Research related meditative activity in peer reviewed journals, have literally ‘exploded’ (See Fig: below).

Further, many State schools, Universities in USA, have adopt-ed this ‘tool’ of Mindfulness meditation for public school teachers and their students. It has become a hot trend in American education. We in Sri Lanka, at least as far as I know, beside privately arranged Retreats, no formal curricular change has been tried in teaching institutions. it was, Late Prof Eugene Wickramanayaka, who conducted the very popular, early morning Bhavana Sessions for Medical Students and all comers at the Anatomy Dept: of the University of Peradeniya. Should we not introduce it to our school curriculum as an entirely secular subject?

Some of the subjects discussed in this article are detailed in my 150 page book Buddhist Philosophy and Neuroscience, sold at Sarasavi Bookshop outlets and BPS outlets at Rs 800 a copy. The money so accrued is entirely used to fund the Migara Trust, which funds in-need medical students of the University of Peradeniya. A companion volume The Conditioned Self  -170 Pg: Bk is due out soon.

DBS Jeyaraj: The journalist, the human being, and the friend

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.