‘Local tourism could enhance presence of high spenders rather than depend on backpackers’

Inauguration of café 2024 was described as ‘The Culinary Spectacle’. The event was broad based to include culinary artistry in varied fields of food production. Wondrous skills in producing myriad dishes were on display but the event also pointed to the possibility of Sri Lanka attracting tourists in greater numbers than now.

Presidential Senior Advisor on National Security and Chief of the President’s Staff Sagala Ratnayake said Sri Lanka’s tourism potential was not fully tapped, considering its existing attractions. ‘Sri Lanka could bring in a greater number of tourists than experienced currently. We have every possibility of enhancing the high-spending tourist presence rather than depend on back packers, he said.

Ratnayaka was speaking at the inauguration of Sri Lanka’s pre-eminent hospitality event, Hotel Show Colombo 2024 on July 26th. It was the opinion of informed sources that the event is poised to elevate the standards of the hotel industry through the adaptation of hospitality related innovations, both in respect of products and services. Ms. Marie-Noelle Duris, Charge d’Affaires at the embassy of France in Sri Lanka and Ms. Lisa Whanstall, Deputy British High Commissioner, besides other prominent figures, graced the occasion.

Organized by the Sri Lanka Hospitality Graduates Association in collaboration with CDC Events, and bolstered by both state and private sector support, Hotel Show Colombo has established itself as the pinnacle of hospitality exhibitions over the past 26 years. It has continuously evolved to meet the dynamic needs of the industry and serves as a vital platform for exhibitors to meet their business objectives while fostering growth and innovation within the sector. It is endorsed by all the regional hospitality-related associations, together with the Sri Lanka Conventions Bureau.

NSB records a PBT of Rs.15.0 billion for first six months of 2024

Sri Lanka welcomes prominent Polish celebrity couple to boost tourism

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.