Sri Lanka may call for tenders for Indian Adani-withdrawn wind power plants

ECONOMYNEXT – Sri Lanka could call for international tenders for wind power plants in the island nation’s Northern Mannar and Pooneryn after India’s Adani Green withdrew early this year due to price difference, Energy Minister Kumara Jayakody said.

India’s Adani Group decided to withdraw its wind power deals with Sri Lanka in February this year after the new government prepared to renegotiate the project for a lower price.

The previous government had agreed for 8.26 cents U.S. dollar unit cost of wind power, but President Anura Kumara Dissanayake’s administration wanted it to be reduced below 6 cents U.S. dollars.

“Based on the requirement, we will go for a tender and give it to the best bidder. Even Adani or any other party can bid for that. We will be giving the project to the lowest and successful bidder,” Minister Jayakody told reporters at a media briefing on Friday.

“Even before the election, we had been told that we can’t give electricity to the consumers and industries at a lower price after buying it at a higher price.”

“The discussion we had (with Adani) was if they can reduce the price to around 5 cents US dollar, we can go ahead. They withdrew with a mutual understanding.”

Under the signed power purchase agreement, Adani Green Energy was to invest $442 million to build two wind power stations in Sri Lanka’s Northern Province.

Adani Green has been under protracted more than 14 rounds of discussions with the state-owned utility provider Ceylon Electricity Board (CEB) and a raft of Sri Lanka’s government departments in the more than two years to establish the 484 MW renewable energy wind farms at Mannar and Pooneryn, Sri Lanka, along with its associated Transmission system.

Adani Group had said the projects were envisaged to collectively see investments of about $1 billion in Sri Lanka, based on a build own operate concept.

The previous government also approved a tariff fixed for 20 years for the Power Purchase Agreement.

President Dissanayake during his election campaign promised to review proposed Adani’s wind power projects. According to documents filed in court a cabinet decision on January 02, 2025 revoked a May 2024 decision on the Adani project proposal’s tariff.

Adani’s projects ran into controversy after activists went to courts over possible impact on the environment and higher tariff. (Colombo/August 15/2025)