Sri Lanka Retailers’ Association hosts 7th Annual General Meeting

The Sri Lanka Retailer’s Association (SLRA) held its 7th Annual General Meeting at Hilton Residencies on the 19th of July 2024. Outgoing President Charitha Subasinghe, opened proceedings with his address, during which he stated, “Jan 2023 to Jan 2024 the price increases of products were about 60% higher. This has led to the contraction of the demand by about 27%. If that was the contraction for food the contraction in our other subcategories of non-food retailing would be even more significant.

Furthermore, the operating costs of our retail plant is significantly higher. The Turnover based taxes have gone up significantly. In addition to that we are also having competition from the Parallel imports. These importers do not pay the necessary taxes and thus are able to sell at a lower price. With the taxes increasing, the Parallel Import composition has increased. In addition to the impact to the Formal Retail business, the Leakage to the potential tax revenue to the Government runs into Billions of rupees. We have been as an association taking this issue with the different stakeholders. There is some progress but still a lot more to do to close it out.”

He went on to explain, “The contribution to the Sri Lankan Economy from the Retail Sector is much bigger when we look at the Retail sector as a total Eco-System. Why I call it an eco-system is because, in addition to the directly involved suppliers and team members, it also provides investment opportunities for land and building owners and Mall operators to earn a rental income, service providers such as Security companies and Janitorial companies to recruit and provide services, providing boarding facilities and meals to the significant number of team members who come to the city for employment in the retail sector and the transport and logistic providers. If you add the total eco-system, the statistics would be significantly higher.”

Investors’ presidential or parliamentary poll first quandary checks share trading momentum

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.