ComBank ranked ‘Most Loved’ bank brand in Sri Lanka for 2024

The Commercial Bank of Ceylon has been voted Sri Lanka’s ‘Most Loved’ Bank brand and the second ‘Most Loved’ brand in the country overall in the ‘Service’ sector in 2024 by the leading business magazine LMD.

These titles are based on the findings of an online survey by LMD’s research partner PepperCube Consultants.

Readers of LMD from the Western, Southern, Central, North-western and Northern provinces participated in the survey and the Most Loved Brands have been ranked under 34 categories.

Commenting on this valuable public endorsement, Commercial Bank Deputy General Manager Retail Banking and Marketing Mr Hasrath Munasinghe said: “An accolade of this nature, which is based on popular sentiment, must be accepted with humility and gratitude. Everything we do is intended to exceed customer expectations and fulfill our obligations to all stakeholder groups. This ranking is a great source of encouragement and an affirmation for every Commercial Bank employee that we are doing things right.”

The Bank said it places utmost importance on customer service excellence, continually monitoring customer sentiments through rigorous scientific research. Each business unit is actively engaged in implementing actions to address customer feedback promptly. With a firm commitment to customer convenience, the Bank prioritizes customer needs when designing products and services. Furthermore, the Bank’s brand development strategy emphasizes inclusive brand communications, fostering customer interactions through national-level event sponsorships and dynamic digital marketing campaigns. Notably, the Bank’s digital and social media channels prioritize active engagement with audiences, going beyond mere product promotion to establish meaningful connections. This customer-centric approach has propelled the Bank’s brand to become one of the most loved in the country.

Earlier this year, Commercial Bank was also voted the ‘Peoples Private Bank of the Year’ at the Sri Lanka Institute of Marketing (SLIM) – Kantar Peoples Awards, and received several other international and local awards including Best Bank in Sri Lanka and Best SME Bank in Sri Lanka from Global Finance of the UK.

The largest private sector bank in Sri Lanka, the first Sri Lankan bank to be listed among the Top 1000 Banks of the World and the country’s first 100% carbon neutral bank, Commercial Bank operates a strategically-located network of branches and 964 automated machines island-wide, and is the largest lender to Sri Lanka’s SME sector. A leader in digital innovation, Commercial Bank has the widest international footprint among Sri Lankan Banks, with 20 outlets in Bangladesh, a Microfinance company in Nay Pyi Taw, Myanmar, and a fully-fledged Tier I Bank with a majority stake in the Maldives.

Related Topics:ComBank ranked ‘Most Loved’ bank brand in Sri Lanka for 2024The Commercial Bank of Ceylon

IOM Sri Lanka and Ministry of Defence in collaboration with Sri Lankan Airlines conduct programme on responding to human trafficking

ComBank crowned ‘Best Bank in Sri Lanka’ by Global Finance for 22nd year

ComBank raises Rs 12 bn. as Debentures are snapped up on opening day

ComBank & Green Building Council in landmark agreement to promote sustainable construction

ADB names ComBank its ‘Leading Partner Bank’ in Sri Lanka for 3rd year

ComBank ranked strongest bank brand and country’s 2nd strongest brand overall

ACCA reaffirms ComBank as best among Sri Lankan banks for Sustainable Reporting

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.