Janaka Ratnayake open to supporting better Presidential candidate

Ex-PUCSL Chairman says he and his supporters are willing to support any candidate who would be a better choice than himself

Says country needs a leader who is good, brave and understands the economy to effectively carrying out their duties

Urges voters to make wise choices in upcoming elections to ensure SL’s revival

Presidential hopeful and former Chairman of the Public Utilities Commission of Sri Lanka (PUCSL) Janaka Ratnayake yesterday said he would not hesitate to support any other Presidential candidate in the upcoming election whom he believes would be a better choice than himself.

“I am not claiming to be the best candidate for the job. Therefore, if I am convinced that another candidate is a better choice, both I and the organisations that have endorsed me will not hesitate to lend our support to that candidate,” he said.

“This is because we need a leader who is good, brave, and understands the economy, capable of effectively carrying out their duties,” he noted.

Ratnayake made these comments after he declared open his main Presidential elections operations office in Colombo yesterday. The businessman and former PUCSL Chairman has initiated election campaign activities under the banner of the National Civil Organisations Front. Ratnayake, supported by various civil society and mass organisations, is pledging to establish a corruption-free Sri Lanka and foster a robust national economy.

Ratnayake also expressed his hope yesterday that the people of the country would make wise choices and vote for the right candidates in the upcoming Parliamentary

“I hope the people do not act unintelligently and vote blindly this time around. Instead, I encourage them to vote for those who truly deserve to represent them in Parliament and as President,” he emphasised. He stressed that only by making wise choices in the voting process, Sri Lanka will be able to revive and overcome the current crisis situation.