Sri Lanka’s chicken egg farmers shrink flocks, day-old chick prices cut

ECONOMYNEXT – Sri Lanka’s Three Acre Farms, a top poultry company said revenues dropped 27 percent to 1,231 million rupees in the June 2025 quarter as farmers reduced purchases of day old chicks as prices dropped.

“The group’s revenue during the quarter under review declined compared to the same quarter last year, primarily due to reduced demand for both broiler and layer day-old chicks,” Chief Executive Cheng Chih Kwong told shareholders in interim accounts.

“The decline was mainly caused by reduced inputs by farmers at the beginning of the quarter due to lower live bird prices and continued volatility in the table egg market.”

Sri Lanka’s chicken and broiler prices soared in 2022 as macroeconomists created a forex shortage by cutting rates with printed money to boost growth (potential output) and inflation (flexible inflation targeting and the rupee collapsed.

Day old chick prices and grain prices also soared. Sri Lanka’s chicken farmers culled their stocks when the Consumer Affairs Authority slammed price control, as macroeconomists destroyed the internal and external value of the rupee, using their money monopoly.

Though broiler production recovers quickly it took almost two years for farmers to rebuild their stocks from the hit given by macro-economists and the CAA.

However, in 2023 and 2024 the central bank has operated largely deflationary policy under an IMF program which made it sell-down its domestic assets which has allowed the rupee to be strong and the agency lost the ability to create inflation.

Under the revised IMF program however it is no longer required to sell-down its domestic assets, and the agency had got the power to active ‘monetary policy’ again, which analysts have warned can lead to a second sovereign default.

As farmers rebuilt their flocks, initially paying very high prices for day-old chicks, egg prices began to drop, leading to some farmers not expanding stocks and reducing their farms, according to industry officials.

Meanwhile Three Acre Farms said it had cut prices of layer and broiler day old chicks further reducing revenues.

Companies have to boost productivity if the central bank stops giving free profits by increasing the cost of living.

RELATE : Sri Lanka poultry firm boosts efficiency as central bank inflation target missed

Profits in the March 2024 quarter dropped 75 percent to 109.6 million rupees.

Sri Lanka has potential to build an export industry in export eggs and poultry products but the sector is constrained and due to high import duties and licenses on maize which makes raw materials too expensive, analysts and industry officials have said.

RELATED : Sri Lanka poultry exports blocked by maize autarky, import licensing

The massive import taxes on grain, including rice, has kept food prices sharply above the world, while maize taxes have promoted protein malnutrition among children of poor families, critics have said.

The so-called ‘maize mafia’ which promotes import duties and licensing at the cost of protein malnutrition has a history growing back three decades involving regional and national level political corruption linked to grain purchasing, insiders say.

The ‘self-sufficiency’ and ‘import substitution’ strategies which exploit the poor are also justified on the basis of forex shortages created by macro-economists as the ‘cut rates’ with inflationary open market operations and other liquidity injections.  (Colombo/Aug15/2025)