Parliament

‘We have achieved milestone in protecting rights of the child’

Foreign Affairs and Foreign Employment Deputy Minister Arun Hemachandra told Parliament yesterday that Sri Lanka has achieved a significant milestone in protecting the rights of the child with the introduction of the Penal Code (Amendment) Act aiming at ending corporal punishment against children and enhancing penalties for those who harm children.

This amendment will provide answers to the various forms of violence that children in Sri Lanka have faced for a long time, he said.

A large number of complaints have been received about physical and mental violence against children every year. But the laws and regulations were not enough to enforce the law against the perpetrators. Now, with the enactment of this law, the perpetrators can be punished, the Deputy Minister said.

“We will continue to bring such progressive amendments because we want to take this society to a better place. In the past, it was part of the political culture to bring and produce poisonous drugs in the country. If this culture had continued further, the future generations of our country would never have a country to live in,” the Deputy Minister said.

Samagi Jana Balawegaya (SJB) MP Ajith P. Perera raised concerns about the wording of the Penal Code (Amendment) Bill in connection with non-physical punishment of students by teachers stating that the new law brought forward in the Bill is too rigid and too strong.

Speaking in Parliament yesterday (24) during the Second Reading debate on the Penal Code (Amendment) Bill, the MP warned that ‘non-physical punishment’ could be interpreted too broadly and adversely affect parents and teachers in future if the Bill is passed as it is.

“By the Abolition of Corporal Punishment Act No. 23 of 2005, 21 years ago, corporal punishment has been removed in the country, and therefore it is not a new thing.

“Even though I agree with all the things spoken by Women and Child Affairs Minister Saroja Savithri Paulraj during her opening speech on the Bill, there is a question as the Bill contains some problematic, practical moral and legal issues which adversely affect teachers, parents and children.”

Perera pointed out that the amendment of the Bill under 308A(a) states, “Anybody who carries out the non-physical act with knowledge that is likely to cause humiliation however light ends up carrying out corporal punishment on a child” is too broad and the meaning of the word ‘humiliation’ needs to be further amended.

‘Report on misuse of Central Cultural Fund to be released soon’

Buddhasasana, Religious and Cultural Affairs Deputy Minister Gamagedara Dissanayake said in Parliament yesterday that the report of the three-member committee appointed to investigate the misuse of the Central Cultural Fund during the years 2016 to 2019 will be released in the next few days.

The Deputy Minister stated that the final stage of preparing the report is currently underway and SJB MP Ajith P. Perera is trying to spread an incorrect opinion regarding him.

He made this statement in response to an allegation made by SJB MP Perera during the debate on the Second Reading of the Penal Code (Amendment) Bill.

“MP Perera informed this House about something wrong. An explanation is required. This is the Central Cultural Fund Act. The Act states how the funds under this Act should be used. The misuse of the money in that fund took place between 2016 and 2019. More than Rs.8,000 million has been spent without any approval from the board. It was discussed from time to time.

“Since that discussion needed to be legally recognised, we appointed a three-member committee. This committee was appointed under the chairmanship of former High Court Judge Pradeep Jayathilake. It was appointed on July 7. I appointed it on the basis that the committee report should be submitted within two months.

“However, due to various technical issues, the committee had to be convened on July 30. As far as I know, the report has been prepared and is in the final stage. But in addition to the facts that are clearly convincing from that report, as a representative representing that board, we also receive various information on people who were responsible for misusing these funds during the period 2016-2019. When these people receive criticism regarding these wrongful interventions, they are afraid and level various allegations against us. We are currently receiving reports that the basic conditions of this Act have been violated.”

“If the report of the three-member committee appointed to investigate the misuse of the Central Cultural Fund during the years 2016-2019 has been prepared, I challenge the Deputy Minister of Buddhasasana, Religious and Cultural Affairs, Gamagedara Dissanayake, to present it to the House.

“The Deputy Minister had made a statement that there had been a fraud of Rs. 8,000 million in the Cultural Fund. He said that it had been discovered by a commission appointed by the Government. We know why the previous Government and this Government continue to raise allegations about this Cultural Fund. A three-member committee has been appointed to examine the Central Cultural Fund. Former High Court Judge Pradeep Jayathilake, Civil Engineer Sarath Ramanayake, and retired Assistant Auditor General K. Chandrapala were members of this committee.

“It is said that this committee should submit its report within two months. If there is such a report, this House should know about it. The Government newspaper also published this in this regard. I challenge Deputy Minister Gamagedara Dissanayake to present it if this committee has prepared a report. Otherwise, this Deputy Minister is committing an offence that should be punished according to the code of ethics of Parliamentarians.

“Did committee Chairman Pradeep Jayathilake give it to you before the committee report is released?”

A total of 111 MPs have obtained official residences at the Parliament Members’ housing complex in Madiwela by September 1, this year.

Meanwhile, 112 MPs have not submitted requests to obtain houses as well. The MPs’ housing complex consists of 120 houses.

This was mentioned in the reply tabled by the Prime Minister in Parliament yesterday.

The eligible MPs will be provided with a house on rent and must prove their ownership of a house within a distance of 40 kilometres for a period of time through an affidavit.

The current monthly rent of Rs. 2,000 will be collected from the Members of Parliament who obtain houses for residence and in addition, a housing deposit of Rs. 2,000 will be collected.

The rent will be credited to the Government revenue monthly and the housing deposit will be credited to an account opened in the name of each resident Member of Parliament at the Bank of Ceylon branch of the Parliament under the custody of the Secretary General of Parliament.

A heated discussion between the ruling party and the opposition MPs ensued when Samagi Jana Balawegaya (SJB) MP Dayasiri Jayasekara asked for the disclosure of the 3,000 cryptocurrencies obtained by Minister Wasantha Samarasinghe and the USDT 1,850 in the Binance account of Speaker Dr. Jagath Wickramaratne.

MP Jayasekara raising a question of privilege in Parliament yesterday (24) pointed out that due to this reason, the privileges of all the people’s representatives in Parliament have been violated and therefore, attention must be paid to this matter urgently.

Jayasekara asked this question of privilege by citing the Financial Commitments of Members of Parliament, Part VI, Sections 14-22 of the Code of Conduct for Members of Parliament, drafted in accordance with the Powers and Privileges of Parliament Act, No. 21 of 1953 and passed on March 07, 2018. Accordingly, MP Jayasekara stated that this question of privilege is being raised regarding the breach of privileges therein.

The MP also said that in accordance with the said Code of Conduct, the declarations of assets and liabilities submitted by all Members of Parliament in the present Parliament have now been published on the website of the Commission to Investigate Allegations of Bribery or Corruption (CIABOC).

Accordingly, Jayasekara said that Trade and Commerce Minister Samarasinghe has stated that he has 3,000 cryptocurrencies and Speaker Dr. Jagath Wickramaratne has stated that he has 1,850 USDT in his Binance account.