Sri Lanka president must priortise debt restructuring, stability over Rajpaksas: Patali

ECONOMYNEXT — President Ranil Wickremesinghe must decide between sending the Rajapaksas back to parliament and restructuring debt by June to stabilise the country for the next decade, opposition MP Patali Champika Ranawaka said.

Speaking to reporters, Ranawaka said Basil Rajapaksa, the ideologue of the ruling Sri Lanka Podujana Peramuna (SLPP), is well aware that his party cannot come into power through the presidential due to be held between September 17 and October 17 this year.

“Basil knows the Rajapaksas can’t come into power again through this election, so he’s trying to see if they can somehow hold a general election before that and enter parliament,” said Ranawaka.

“The president must decide what’s important, whether to send five Rajapaksas to parliament or to speak to our creditors and restructure our external debt by June and stabilise the country for the next decade,” he said.

Education Minister Susil Premajanaytha said on Tuesday March 26 that Sri Lanka’s next national election will definitely be a presidential election as no funds have been allocated for a parliamentary election and there is no time for that in 2024,.

“The presidential election is definitely coming. There is no time to hold a parliamentary election, and no funds have been allocated. Attempting to do that is futile,” he said.

President Ranil Wickremesinghe’s United National Party (UNP) also indicated that a presidential poll will be held first. UNP general secretary Palitha Range Bandara said the president is obligated to follow the constitution.

Wickremesinghe met with Basil Rajapaksa last week where the matter of which election to hold first had been discussed. The president had reportedly told his cabinet ministers later that the presidential election will be held first.

Rajapaksa and the SLPP, meanwhile, have been advocating for early parliamentary polls, arguing that whatever party that wins the presidential election will be able to consolidate power by winning big at the parliamentary elections that will follow. This would not be in the best interest of democracy, Rajapaksa claimed in one interview, though he did not voice this concern when the SLPP went onto secure a two thirds’ majority at the 2020 parliamentary polls after his brother Gotabaya Rajapaksa won the 2019 presidential poll in an unprecedented landslide a few months earlier. (Colombo/Mar29/2024)