Celebrations in Dubai for ‘Island Beat of Sri Lanka’

Yenuli Neriah may not be a big name in the scene here but she did impress many on Sirisa TV’s The Voice Kids Blind Auditions singing ‘Master Sir.’

Yenuli is, in fact, based in Dubai and that is probably the reason local music lovers have not got the opportunity to experience her singing capabilities.

In Dubai, however, she is in the limelight but because of her schooling (she is only 14 years old) her work connected with the showbiz scene is limited.

Nevertheless, in order to keep herself in the spotlight, Yenuli has embarked on doing her own music and has come up with a vibrant track, called ‘Island Beat of Sri Lanka.’

This track, written by Yenuli’s talented parents and composed by the gifted Dubai-based composer Hansika Thimira, will be released on Saturday 11th January, at a special event to be held at the V Club, Dubai Mercure Gold Hotel.

“Join us for the much-anticipated release of the vibrant new track by Yenuli Neriah – ‘Island Beat of Sri Lanka.’

Yenuli Neriah: ‘Master Sir’ at Sirisa TV’s The Voice Kids Blind Auditions

‘Island Beat of Sri Lanka’ to be officially released on 11th January

V Club, Dubai Mercure Gold Hotel Get ready to immerse yourself in the soulful rhythms and enchanting melodies that capture the essence of Sri Lanka. Experience an unforgettable morning filled with Seven Notes music, energy, and celebration! Don’t miss out on this special occasion!”

The band Seven Notes, incidentally, is made up of Sri Lankans, based in Dubai, and they are doing extremely well, with their brand of music – a combination of western and oriental.

They are seen in action at Sri Lankan events, in Dubai, including dances and charity shows.

Yes, it’s certainly an interesting scene for Yenuli Neriah who was in Sri Lanka last week to shoot the music video for ‘Island Beat of Sri Lanka.’

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.