Govt. accepts responsibility for students with disabilities: PM

Building a respectful education system that treats everyone equally is a fundamental objective of the Government, while it has also accepted the responsibility of ensuring a better future for students with disabilities, Prime Minister Dr. Harini Amarasuriya said.

The Prime Minister made these remarks while participating in the “Sarasavi Dirio Abhiman” ceremony organised by the President’s Fund to recognise university students with disabilities at the Swami Vipulananda Institute of Aesthetic Studies of the Eastern University yesterday (12).

As part of the third phase of the programme, the Prime Minister presented certificates of appreciation and financial assistance of Rs.100,000 each to 50 students with disabilities studying at the Eastern and South-Eastern universities in the Eastern Province.

The Prime Minister also appreciated the support extended by the Eastern Provincial Divisional Secretariats and Divisional Secretaries in implementing the activities of the President’s Fund at the regional level.

Addressing the gathering, Dr. Amarasuriya said she was proud of the students who had overcome numerous challenges without giving up and continued their education.

“I feel very proud of all of you. You have set a good example to the world about how to move forward without giving up despite the challenges,” she said.

She also expressed her gratitude to the parents of the students for protecting, supporting and caring for them throughout their journey.

The Prime Minister said that, in line with the Government’s policy vision of “A rich country is a beautiful life,” the Government was working to build a respectful society through an education system that treats everyone equally.

She said the Government had already taken steps to provide a monthly allowance of Rs.5,000 to university students from low-income families as well as schoolchildren from low-income families.

Dr. Amarasuriya stressed that free education should not be limited to providing textbooks, incentives and other financial assistance, but should also ensure that students have a conducive environment in which to pursue their education.

In this regard, she said the Government had commenced a project to construct 55 university hostels to benefit around 16,000 students.

She said the hostels would be constructed according to a special plan that would take into consideration the needs and convenience of students with disabilities.

The Prime Minister also said the Government had launched a pilot project to produce and distribute digital and other equipment required by students with disabilities in schools and universities.

She said vocational training and employment programmes had also been initiated to help students with disabilities become economically independent.

Furthermore, Dr. Amarasuriya said the Government planned to introduce measures under the new education reforms to familiarise students with the job market by providing access to vocational education from school level.

“Through all of this, we hope to build self-confidence and build an education system that can help us move up in the job market,” she said.

She added that students with disabilities should also become leaders in the country’s transformational journey.

The Prime Minister said a country could not be developed merely by changing the Government, stressing that national development required the Government, public officials and citizens to work together towards a common vision and goal.

She said the Government had, during the two years since it came into office, created the necessary space for such a journey to succeed.

The event was attended by Speaker of Parliament Dr. Jagath Wickramaratne, Minister of Industry and Entrepreneurship Development Sunil Handunnetti, Eastern Province Governor Dr. Jayantha Lal Ratnasekera, Members of Parliament, officials of the President’s Fund, university vice chancellors, scholarship recipients and their parents.