US Justice Dept says Iranian contract killer behind planned Israeli attack in Sri Lanka

ECONOMYNEXT – The United States’ Justice Department has said an Iranian named Farhad Shakeri who was hired to murder President-elect Donald Trump was tasked with targeting Israeli tourists in Sri Lanka.

There was no immediate response from Iran on the allegation against its national who the US Justice Department said is residing in Tehran.

The US Justice Department in a statement said the Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps (IGRC) — a designated foreign terrorist organization — has been conspiring with criminals and hitmen to target and gun down Americans on U.S. soil.

“…according to statements made by Shakeri in recorded interviews with law enforcement agents, the IRGC has also tasked Shakeri with carrying out other assassinations against U.S. and Israeli citizens located in the United States,” it said.

“In particular, Shakeri has informed law enforcement that he was tasked on Oct. 7, 2024, with providing a plan to kill President-elect Donald J. Trump.”

“During the interview, Shakeri claimed he did not intend to propose a plan to kill Trump within the timeframe set by the IRGC. He also stated he was tasked with surveilling two Jewish American citizens residing in New York City and offered $500,000 by an IRGC official for the murder of either victim.”

“He was also tasked with targeting Israeli tourists in Sri Lanka.”

It was not immediately clear how Iranian Shakeri got acquaintance with alleged plotters in Sri Lanka who are now under investigation for a possible attack against Jewish nationals at a location in Sri Lanka’s Eastern coastal tourism hotspot of Arugam Bay.

The US embassy in Colombo on October 23 warned its citizens not to travel to Arugam Bay in the island’s Eastern Coast as there was credible information of an attack.

Seven countries – the US, Israel, Russia, Canada, United Kingdom, New Zealand, and Australia – issued travel advisories after at least three foreign intelligence agencies alerted of a possible attack in Arugam Bay.

Sri Lanka police have said six suspects have been arrested and the investigations are still in progress.

Cabinet Spokesman Vijitha Herath this week said it was too early to decide if the alert was a false alarm. (Colombo/November 09/2024)