Young entrepreneur looking to mobilise ‘designwear movement’ among Sri Lankan women

Empowering women through an athletic-leisure designwear movement, and building a sisterhood by sharing this transformative trend is the mission of our brand, said Amani Nawushad – the young Founder and CEO of Aura Active athleisure (clothing) products, addressing the media in Colombo on Dec.22, 2024.

Speaking at the launch of her boutique in Horton Pace Colombo 7, she said,” Aura Active is a business about women empowerment, and we are creating a community through our brand. We are showcasing high- quality, affordable products which are manufactured in Sri Lanka. Aura Active is a brand where we actually try to build a community when you buy the product, makes you part of the brand in a wider and growing network of sisterhood. This is what Aura Active is about. Join the movement and follow Aura Active Club on instagram for updates and inspiration.”

“Sri Lanka’s athleisure scene is undergoing a transformation, thanks to Aura Active, a brand redefining what it means to look good, feel good, and stay active. Designed exclusively for women, Aura Active combines high-quality, stylish, and versatile clothing with a mission to promoting inclusivity and encouraging women to embrace healthy, active lifestyles.”

“Every piece is meticulously crafted to suit the diverse needs of women—whether it’s hitting the gym, running errands, or relaxing in comfort. Aura Active’s designs embody a modern, minimalist aesthetic, with colors that exude elegance and strength; the soft hues of Blush, the bold depth of Midnight, and the sleek confidence of Onyx. Aura Active products are designed for championing women’s sports as well as their inclusivity. Thus, the brand will become a beacon for celebrating women’s achievements on and off the field. Our goal is to inspire women to feel confident and capable in every aspect of their lives.”

“Aura Active is an athleisure space where women empowerment and style go hand in hand. From its chic designs to its empowering message, Aura Active will be setting a new standard in Sri Lankan fashion, proving that strength, style, and sisterhood are the ultimate combination.”

“Aura Active is an athleisure space where women empowerment and style go hand in hand. From its chic designs to its empowering message, Aura Active will be setting a new standard in Sri Lankan fashion, proving that strength, style, and sisterhood are the ultimate combination”, she said.

Aura Active’s first pop-up event took place on December 22nd where the attendees could experience the collection firsthand.

CEB connects a new substation to the national grid powering Sri Lanka’s energy landscape

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.