Defend AG, stop autocracy

There has been no let-up in pro-government propagandists’ social media attacks on Attorney General (AG) Parinda Ranasinghe. AG’s Department Legal Officers’ Association has raised concerns over unfounded and baseless personal attacks on AG Ranasinghe and some other officers of his department. A resolution unanimously adopted by the association at a special general meeting on 29 Jan., 2026, states that the attacks appear to be part of a coordinated effort to pressure the AG and his staff, potentially undermining the department’s independence. It has warned that the systematic abuse of social media to create a false sense of public dissatisfaction, and that unchecked intimidation could cause lasting harm to the rule of law, justice system, and public trust in democratic governance. One cannot but agree with them that the ongoing vilification campaign against the AG and some of his subordinates is part of a sinister campaign that must be unreservedly condemned.

The JVP-NPP government has been acting in a manner that blurs the line between the party and the state. It is apparently working according to a plan to enable the JVP to arrogate to itself the powers of vital state institutions and perpetuate its rule. However, it is not alone in having striven to do so. The late President J. R. Jayewardene did everything in his power to place his party and himself above the state, and President Mahinda Rajapaksa made a similar effort to ensure the perpetuation of his party’s rule. Thankfully, both leaders failed in that endeavour.

The legal officers of the AG’s Department have reaffirmed their full confidence in AG Ranasinghe, underscoring that the AG is accountable to the law and appropriate legal channels exist for addressing anyone’s grievances. The AG’s Department, they have said in their resolution, will continue to act strictly in accordance with the law and admissible evidence, resisting pressure from public rhetoric or media-driven narratives. They have expressed their gratitude to the Bar Association of Sri Lanka, legal professionals, and members of the public who voiced support for AG Ranasinghe, noting his integrity and the department’s commitment to its workload despite resource shortages.

Now that the legal officers of the AG’s Department have vowed to ‘continue to act strictly in accordance with the law and admissible evidence’, how do they propose to prevent governments from using their institution to protect politicians.

One may recall that in August 2025, the Mount Lavinia Magistrate hearing a case against Minister Wasantha Samarasinghe, Deputy Minister of Labour Mahinda Jayasinghe and Mayor of Kaduwela Ranjan Jayalal, asked the Colombo Fraud Investigation Bureau why it had submitted the investigation report to the AG before recording statements from the suspects. The police could not provide an answer––for obvious reasons. How could they tell the court that they had done so at the behest of the powers that be? President’s Counsel Maitree Gunaratne, representing the aggrieved party, said the court order to arrest the suspects had been ignored, and that the police had sought instructions of the AG to mislead the judiciary. Subsequently, the Magistrate received a transfer. When the case was taken up again in September 2025, the court noted that the case file had already been referred to the Attorney General for advice!

Thus, while using the AG’s Department to delay the judicial process and prevent the arrest of ruling party politicians, the NPP-JVP government wants it to go all out to have Opposition politicians arrested even before investigations against them get underway in earnest. The aforesaid forgery case is scheduled to be taken up in a few weeks, and it will be interesting to see what the AG’s advice to the Fraud Bureau is.

Everyone who cherishes democracy and the rule of law must stand firmly with the beleaguered AG and his department and help stop the country’s drift towards autocracy.

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.