‘Tourism SMEs driven from pillar to post by Yahapalana, Gota and Ranil governments’

Outgoing president of the Association for Small and Medium Enterprises in Tourism (ASMET), Rohan Abeywickrama, in a scathing attack on the country’s administrations said that the ‘Yahapalanaya’ government and those that came under Gotabaya Rajapaksa and Ranil Wickremesinghe have driven the small and medium sector in tourism from pillar to post.

In a recent interview with The Island Financial Review the tourism industry veteran said the governments that ruled the country from 2015 to date have fully neglected the small and medium sector in tourism though political leaders and bureaucrats have paid lip service to developing tourism.

Abeywickarama added: ‘During the pandemic the government granted a moratorium to the small and medium enterprises in tourism at a very high interest but due to the severe economic downturn the country faced members in the above sector like many others, failed to pay back the loans obtained.

‘To make matters worse, the banks have slapped an interest on those loans and as a result they are forced to pay more than the borrowed capital to the banks. Now the borrowers are likely to lose their assets due to Parate execution by the banks. Due to the shortsighted policies of governments, the death knell of the small and medium enterprises in tourism would sound sooner than later.

‘I strongly urge whoever is elected President at the forthcoming presidential election to come to the rescue of the small and medium enterprises in tourism by waiving the accumulated interest due to the banks by those companies that have obtained loans since 2018.

‘In July parliament approved a loan scheme titled ‘Reenergizer’ for the SME sector through local banks. But when ASMET inquired from the relevant banks, to its utter dismay it was told that all loans had already been disbursed during the weekend and that there was nothing left for tourism SMEs.

‘How could the loans be disbursed when the banks are closed during the weekend?’

Sri Lanka Lifts Import Restrictions on Motor Vehicles Effective October 1, 2024

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.