Global expansion of single-origin Sri Lankan chocolate a major struggle: Mendis

Chocolatier Mendis points out shortage of cocoa beans and poor cooperation of authorities as key challenges

Says local growers stand to gain higher prices, due to limited availability of cocoa globally

Sri Lanka’s celebrity chocolatier, chef and agriculture enthusiast Gerard Mendis faces an uphill battle in his bid to take single-origin Sri Lankan chocolates global. This is primarily due to the shortage of cocoa beans and absence of active cooperation of authorities.

“In Sri Lanka, we have our own cocoa beans but we don’t have a sufficient quantity to cater to the demand of the local market. I took some (local) cocoa beans to a factory in Switzerland. Their feedback was that it (Sri Lankan cocoa) was one of the best they had ever tried and were keen on getting more. Unfortunately, we don’t have the quantity,” Mendis told Mirror Business.

Mendis shared that the authorities are yet to show any indications of active cooperation in reviving the domestic coca supply, to tap into the export potential.  “I went and spoke to the Export Development Board. We had a meeting with all of their directors. I requested them to share the database of all growers, so we can approach them. Up to date, we haven’t heard anything from them on this,” he added.

While Sri Lanka once boasted about the thriving cocoa estates, many have disappeared over the years. As a result, the local producers, even those serving the domestic market, are compelled to import part of their supply from Africa and Southeast Asia. “I am a chocolatier; I have to import the base, to make my chocolates, from Switzerland or Belgium. All those countries get their cocoa beans from Ghana, Madagascar and Java, as Europe doesn’t grow cocoa,” noted Mendis.

With the rising prices and limited availability, Mendis highlighted that the Sri Lankan growers stand to gain higher prices.

“Chocolate is considered to be one of the most consumed products at the moment. They can’t cope with the global demand. If we have enough beans, there will be people fighting to buy them,” he added.

President Ranil Wickremesinghe early this year urged the stakeholders to explore inter-cropping with cocoa, particularly in identified areas such as Matale, Kandy, Mawathagama and Dodangaslanda and encouraged collaboration with the smallholders.

He shared that the government plans to collaborate with the smallholders and discussions with the governments of Ghana and Ivory Coast, for access to cocoa. However, no progress has been made in this regard as yet.

Addressing the Lanka Confectionary Manufacturers Association Annual General Meeting in January, Wickremesinghe called on the industry to actively look at exporting chocolates and expressed confidence in Sri Lanka delivering a world-class product.