Their name says it all…

Brightening up the music scene is what this seven-piece outfit has in mind…as Luminosity.

They became a reality three years ago and have been quite active, since then, keeping music lovers entertained with their versatility.

Led and managed by Bianka Wijewardane, a singer, counting 15 years of experience, the band has been seen in action at several top events, during their short career as Luminosity.

Says Bianka: “We were the first band to play at the Marine Drive Western Breeze Food Festival, organized by the Tourist Board, and we were also the opening band for Sun FM Slow Flow Live.”

As a solo artiste, before the formation of Luminosity, Bianka went on foreign assignments with several leading bands in Colombo, including Aubrey Weiman and Heat, and performed with Wildfire, as well.

Bianka Wijewardane: Responsible for Luminosity become areality (Pic courtesy Chanaka Gayan Alwis Photography)

“I need to say I’m very grateful to the late Aubrey, and Derek, of Wildfire, for guiding me at the beginning of my career.”Bianka has travelled to the Middle East multiple times as a solo artiste.

“I never use tracks. I do it absolutely live, with the band in attendance.”

Right now, she and Luminosity are working on an original and she also has plans to release two of her solo efforts.

On the 30th of last month, Luminosity was featured at the concert ‘Ispirithale’, along with the band Doctor.

They also do the ColomBar and the Taphouse scene, and were featured at the members’ nights at BRC and Otters, the Spring Fest, in Nuwara Eliya, and were seen at the Kurumba tent, during the Joe-Pete cricket encounter, having great fun, backing JAYASRI.

Luminosity is made up of Geethika Lakshan (drums), Vishan Hettiarachchi (keyboards), Nuwan Tharanga (bass), Vilan Olitha (lead guitar), Sachith Ishan Rajapaksha (percussion), Oniesh Demelo (lead vocals) and Bianka Wijewardena (leader and vocals).

Bianka says she wants to make it big in the music scene as a female vocalist.

“I do perform as a solo artiste, whenever the opportunity comes my way, but I’m very keen to pursue a solo career…full time.

“Of course, Luminosity will be there, doing their own thing, and they would also back me, as a solo artiste, when the need arises.

“They are a very versatile outfit and are excellent at both eastern and western music.”

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.