‘Punchi Andare’ brought her fame…

Much in the news these days, especially on social media, is Selini Ratnayake, and that’s because she played an active role in the teledrama ‘Punchi Andare.’

Ninety (90) episodes of this teledrama were televised on Hiru TV, on weekdays, at 6.30 pm.

Selini was involved in the role of ‘Ransina’ – Andare’s sister-in-law – where Ransina loves Andare but another village girl loves Andare, as well.

“Believe me, I got the most reactions to those fight scenes and some people even now call me by the name ‘Ransina’…even at school….”

The shooting of ‘Punchi Andare’ was done at Tissamaharama Ranminithanna.

“It was a very valuable experience for me… the surrounding area was very beautiful and we’ve collected lots of memories.”

Describing her involvement in this particular teledrama, Selini said it was her mother who sent her details for the auditions.

Selini went for the auditions and was selected which brought her lots of joy and happiness.

“Actually, I am very happy and proud that I got to enter this field with a lead role in this classical drama.”

Selini went on to say that she gets lots of support, for her acting career from her family – father, mother and little brother..

“My mother is like my shadow who accompanies me everywhere.”

Selini is 15 years old and studying at St. Joseph’s Girls School Nugegoda, in the English medium, and she will be doing her O/L next year.

She did her primary education at Dehiwala Presbyterian Girls College and represented the school English drama team that won the 2019 and 2020 provincial competitions.

“That’s when I started drama and I say a big thank you to all those who recognized my talent and gave me the encouragement to excel in this field.”

Selini is now practicing William Shakespeare’s ‘Midsummer Night’s Dream’ drama for provincial competitions at school.

Selini also added that she balances her school work and her acting.

“I am hoping to participate in several TV commercials and do some short films, as well.”

Her future dream, she says, is to start her own business – textiles and beauty products – with an eye on the international market.

“Yes, of course, I will continue with my acting career but, probably as a hobby, if my business venture moves into top gear.”

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.