INFRACON 2026 infrastructure and construction exhibition kicks off

INFRACON 2026, Sri Lanka’s premier exhibition dedicated to the infrastructure and construction sector, opened yesterday and will conclude on July 5, 2026, at the Bandaranaike Memorial International Conference Hall in Colombo.

The event will bring together leading companies, industry professionals and decision-makers from across South Asia.

Organised by Lanka Exhibitions and Conference Services (Pvt.) Ltd, in collaboration with SAVOR International Limited of Bangladesh, the exhibition aims to foster regional cooperation and create new opportunities for trade, investment and technological advancement within the infrastructure and construction industries.

INFRACON 2026 will showcase exhibitors and suppliers across five key sectors – HVAC-R and cold chain, power and energy, green energy, safe water management and building materials – offering the visitors an opportunity to explore the latest technologies, products and solutions shaping the future of the industry. The exhibition is endorsed by the Sri Lankan Chapter of The American Society of Heating, Refrigerating and Air-Conditioning Engineers and Solar Industries Association.

The event is supported by several leading industry partners and sponsors, including Gold Sponsor C.W. Mackie PLC, Silver Sponsors AE Solar and Brantel Lanka (Pvt.) Ltd and Phoenix Super PVC, the Official PVC Partner of the exhibition.

The exhibition is expected to attract developers, contractors, engineers, architects, consultants, policymakers, technology providers, investors and buyers from both Sri Lanka and overseas.

International participation from China, India, Pakistan and Bangladesh makes INFRACON 2026 one of the region’s most important industry gatherings.

Designed as a business-focused platform, the exhibition will facilitate direct interaction between the exhibitors and key industry stakeholders.

In addition to the physical exhibition, a dedicated online platform will enable virtual networking and collaboration opportunities for the exhibitors, international visitors and trade buyers. According to the organisers, INFRACON 2026 will further strengthen Sri Lanka’s position as a regional business and MICE destination while contributing to the development and modernisation of the country’s infrastructure and construction sectors.