Sri Lanka floods kill 15, four rivers still rising

ECONOMYNEXT – Torrential monsoon rains have killed 15 people in Sri Lanka and left thousands homeless; authorities warn that water levels were still rising in four major rivers.

Water levels in the Kalu and Nilwala rivers, and the Attanagalu Oya were in ‘major flood’ level, while the Gin and Kelani rivers were in ‘minor flood’ level, Sri Lanka’s Department of Irrigation said in a public warning.

The Department of Meteorology has said heavy rain, strong winds and rough seas conditions will continue until tomorrow morning.

The island’s Disaster Management said 3,727 families were hit by floods and landslides. 641 families have been evacuated.

“The Army, Navy, Air Force, Police, and the Civil Defense Force are aiding in rescue operations,” state minister for Defense Premitha Bandara Tennakoon told reporters.

The Army said it has deployed 20 rescue teams with 17 boats. 25 battalions are on stand-by in several districts, “That’s a force of 8,000 personnel,” spokesman Major General K A N Rasika Kumara said.

The Army is also running 6 kitchens to provide meals to the displaced and has armoured vehicles including unibuffels on stand-by.

The Navy has deployed 40 emergency rescue teams. “39 vessels and additional equipment have been deployed, mainly in the Western province. In addition another 60 teams are on stand-by,” Sri Lanka Navy Spokesperson Captain Gayan Wickramsooriya said. The Navy is also distributing food.

“The Air Force has stationed helicopters in Ratmalana, Katukurunda and Koggala for emergency deployment – these are equipped with rescue equipment and medical personnel if needed. 400 personnel are in operations. We have also deployed a reconnaissance aircraft to monitor flood levels,” Sri Lanka Air Force Spokesperson Group Captain Dushan Wijesinghe said.

President Ranil Wickremesinghe has ordered funds to be released to the Divisional Secretaries to carry out relief work.

Sri Lanka has also ordered that schools in several districts be closed tomorrow also. (Colombo/June3/2024)