‘Big Brother’ cult on the rise?

The Criminal Investigation Department (CID) has apparently prioritised the summoning of journalists over conducting serious investigations. It is apparently preoccupied with political work.

Editor of the Aruna newspaper Mahinda Ileperuma has been summoned by the CID for questioning on a news story that one has to produce a letter from the Chairman of the Public Security Committee (PSC) in one’s residential area, in addition to a Grama Niladari certificate, to obtain a police report. Health and Mass Media Minister Dr. Nalinda Jayatissa and Public Security Minister Ananda Wijepala vehemently denied the news item, in Parliament. The JVP/NPP exercises control over the PSCs. Opposition Leader Sajith Premadasa told Parliament that the media reports on the issue were accurate. But Minister Jayatissa inveighed against Illeperuma and delivered a long lecture on media ethics.

Opposition Leader Premadasa yesterday gave the lie to the government’s claim at issue once again. A notice put up at the Matara Police Station stated that letters from the PSC Chairpersons had to be attached to the applications for police reports, Premadasa told Parliament, tabling a copy of the relevant document. He also tabled the copies of letters issued by a PSC Chairman to the police, recommending the issuance of police reports to two individuals. So, the CID has nothing to probe; the media reports in question are factually correct.

Most of all, there is nothing criminal about the newspaper reports on the PSCs and police clearance certificates. It therefore defies comprehension why the CID has been called in to conduct an investigation. The government is obviously trying to intimidate the media, control information and suppress dissent.

The unfolding situation reminds us of the dystopian novel,  Nineteen Eighty-Four, wherein George Orwell has issued a prescient warning that the modern political systems, characterised by the overconcentration of power in the hands of rulers, mass surveillance and government control over information could face the same fate as the fictitious totalitarian state, Oceania, plagued by the Big Brother cult. The CID is apparently playing the role of the omniscient secret police in Oceania, where the government has total control over the people.

The JVP has been accused of infiltrating all community organisations. The Opposition’s argument that the JVP is all out to use these outfits to consolidate its power at the grassroots level is tenable. The move to make PSC recommendations mandatory for the issuance of police reports is seen as part of the JVP’s strategy.

The CID seems to have forgotten that there are far more important things it has to intensify its focus on, the Easter Sunday carnage being a case in point. Minister Jayatissa never misses an opportunity to pontificate to the media on journalistic ethics. He often urges journalists to get their facts right. So, there is reason to believe that he followed the aforesaid ethical guidelines when he made a statement about the mastermind behind the Easter Sunday terror attacks. He was a member of the Parliamentary Select Committee that probed the Eastern Sunday carnage in 2019. When he was in the Opposition, four years ago, he told BBC that according to ‘investigative evidence’ he was privy to, India had been behind the terror attacks. He is now the Cabinet Spokesman. It will be interesting to know the other government leaders’ position on his allegation. Curiously, the CID has not recorded a statement from him on this very serious claim. Doesn’t the CID consider information about the mastermind behind the Easter Sunday carnage far more serious than a newspaper report about police reports?

The CID would do well to get its priorities right, without going out of its way to advance the government’s political agenda.

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.