Big scene for award-nominated music producer

The name Hemaka Wijeratne may not be familiar with readers but he is an award-nominated music producer and, since his childhood, he has been involved in the field of music.

I’m told that he has good experience and practical knowledge of music, such as EDM /Hip Hop /Urban RnB/Traditional Music /Retro Music and Pop.

What’s more, he has learnt about a variety of new musical and recording production software technologies.

Hemaka, whose stage name is YAKA (now does that ring a bell!), started his music career in 2014, and has worked with leading producers and artistes, including Bathiya & Santhush (former Music Producer /Engineer) and also at Illnoize Studio – IRAJ Productions.

He was nominated for the People’s Choice Award at the 2017 YES FM Awards and also for Best Blockbuster Film Music at the Lux Film Awards.

Notably, American rapper Tech N9ne shared and commented on a track Hemaka mixed and mastered.

In addition, Indian rap stars Paal Dabba and Vengayo reached out to Hemaka, allowing him to establish connections with top Indian film mixer Shadab Rayeen, leading to more international collaborations.

Hemaka attended President’s College, Kotte, where he was highly active and deeply passionate about drama and music.

In the interval between his O/L and A/L exams, he began hosting his own DJ sessions and producing beats, using music production soft wear (FL Studio).

After completing his A/Ls, Hemaka pursued a Higher Diploma in Graphics and Media Production, while continuing to advance his career in audio production.

American rapper Tech N9ne shared and commented on a track Hemaka mixed and mastered

This talented, versatile artiste began his musical journey, working alongside award-winning producer and composer Pasan Liyanage, before collaborating with the renowned duo Bathiya and Santhush (BNS), in 2014, and, a few years later, he joined IRAJ Productions.

Throughout this time, Hemaka composed music for films, TV commercials, movie soundtracks, and corporate songs, covering all aspects of audio production, including recording, mixing, and mastering.

His portfolio features prominent hit productions, such as ‘McDonald’s 555,’ ‘Yan Yan Api Arpico Shopping,’ and the film Prawegaya.

Having gained extensive experience working with both local industry leaders and international artistes, he established his own production company, HITBOX, in 2018.

Additionally, he has worked as a beta tester for Output Audio and Pitch Innovations.

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.