Cabinet cannot decide on elections says Tissa

SJB National Organiser Tissa Attanayake says Cabinet deciding to cancel nominations for LG polls undermines democratic principles and constitutes severe injustice to citizens

Questions authority of Cabinet to make decisions regarding election nominations

Criticises Govt’s actions as usurpation of people’s fundamental right to vote

Promises to hold LG polls under future SJB Govt. led by Sajith Premadasa

Samagi Jana Balawegaya (SJB) National Organiser Tissa Attanayake on Thursday condemned Cabinet Media Spokesman Minister Bandula Gunawardena’s annoucement that the Cabinet will take up for consideration the cancellation of nominations submitted for the Local Government polls last year.

Addressing a press conference in Colombo, Attanayake expressed strong disapproval of the Cabinet’s decision to consider cancelling the nominations for the Local Government election. He emphasised that making such a decision without a recommendation from the Election Commission constitutes a severe injustice to the people.

Attanayake questioned the Cabinet’s authority in making such a decision, stating, “How does the Cabinet decide to call or cancel nominations in a country that has a democratic system and claims to have a free and fair Election Commission? It is a matter for the Election Commission to decide.”

Attanayake emphasised that the power to decide on election nominations rests solely with the Election Commission, and any interference by the cabinet undermines the democratic principles and the independence of the electoral process. He urged the EC to release a statement regarding the decision.

“The highest right granted to the people in the Constitution is the right to vote. Electoral rights cannot be taken away by the cabinet. It is one of the fundamental rights of the people, and the Government has usurped that right. By arranging not to hold the Local Government and Provincial Council elections, the Government has made a serious mistake. This deliberate usurpation of the right to vote is a clear violation of the Constitution.” he said.

Tissa Attanayake emphasised that should the Government neglect to organise the Local Government election in the near future, following Sajith Premadasa’s presidential triumph, both the Local Government and Provincial Council elections will proceed as planned.