Cinnamon Citadel Kandy celebrates the Season with annual Christmas Cake Mixing Ceremony

Cinnamon Citadel Kandy, part of Cinnamon Hotels & Resorts, hosted its cherished annual Christmas Cake Mixing Ceremony, recently, welcoming the season in grand style. This year’s event not only celebrated the spirit of Christmas but also honoured the resort’s recent accolade as South Asia’s Leading Riverfront Hotel/Resort at the South Asian Travel Awards (SATA) 2024. Set against the breathtaking backdrop of the Mahaweli River, the occasion brought together loyal guests and resort staff for a memorable day of festivities.

The event commenced with an enchanting dance performance by students from the Senkadagala Special School, setting a joyous tone. Guests were then guided along the scenic Mahaweli River to the cake mixing area. In a unique tribute to the SATA award, a ceremonial boat delivered the trophy down the river, honouring Cinnamon Citadel Kandy’s distinction as the South Asian region’s premier riverfront destination.

In a gesture of unity and seasonal joy, guests joined in the lively preparation of the Christmas cake by mixing an array of dried fruits, spices, and spirits. The ceremony concluded with a riverside high tea ceremony at Café C, the fine dining restaurant of Cinnamon Citadel Kandy, where guests savoured treats and enjoyed the camaraderie of the festive gathering.

As part of the Sri Lanka Resorts properties by Cinnamon Hotels & Resorts, Cinnamon Citadel Kandy is known for offering a blend of local culture and luxury in a historical setting. Which once stood as the historic Dunuwila Walawwa, the resort has become an iconic destination in Kandy, showcasing refined elegance and traditional charm. This year’s Christmas Cake Mixing Ceremony reflects the resort’s commitment to excellence and deep appreciation for its guests, who continue to make Cinnamon Citadel Kandy an award-winning retreat in Sri Lanka.

NCCSL workshop on Market Research Insights and Analytics for Business Competitiveness

IMF delegation’s impending visit to Sri Lanka sends positive vibes to stock market

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.