Everbolt Engineering wins three titles at Western Province – Entrepreneur Awards 2024

Everbolt Engineering Ltd., a leading electrical engineering service provider in Sri Lanka, has won three awards at the Western Province – Entrepreneur Awards 2024 organised by the National Chamber of Commerce of Sri Lanka (NCCSL) and National Enterprise Development Authority (NEDA).

It won the Silver award for the ‘Best Entrepreneur of the Year’ (Overall winner), Gold award for ‘Best Innovative Enterprise’, and Gold award for ‘Best Enterprise of the Service Sector’ under the Medium category.

Since its inception, Everbolt has made significant strides in the industrial automation and engineering sector. The company offers a wide range of electrical products and engineering services, such as electrical panel fabrication and installation, soft starters, VFD panels, industrial wiring, lighting arrester and earthing systems, capacitor banks, vision-based applications, web-based applications, online data monitoring, and machine controlling.

Over the years, Everbolt has achieved major milestones. In 2018, it ventured into the service sector with the launch of its sister company, Everbolt Engineering Services Ltd. In 2022, it started CDI Electricals Ltd., focusing on customers’ budgetary needs. It further enhanced its credibility by obtaining ISO 9001:2015 certification in 2022.

Everbolt’s expertise lies in industrial power distribution and control, supported by a team that stays ahead of the latest technologies and trends. Everbolt diversified its products to the organic food industry by introducing organic herbal tea, confectionaries, a hand-made tea range, and dehydrated products. The company prides itself on offering high-quality solutions, reliable customer service, and on-time delivery.

Everbolt Engineering Chairman Chamila Prabath Guruge attributed the company’s success to strong customer relationships and the dedication of its team. “Understanding our customers’ needs and delivering the finest products and services is at the core of our business. This award recognises the hard work of our staff and the trust of our customers,” he said.