Kala Pola – Sri Lanka’s iconic open-air art fair – returns

Sri Lanka’s renowned open-air art fair, Kala Pola, is set to bring alive the streets of Colombo with colour, creativity, and conversation as Kala Pola returns for its 33rd edition on Sunday, 8th February, along Ananda Coomaraswamy Mawatha (Green Path), Colombo 07.

Conceptualised and introduced by The George Keyt Foundation in 1993, and sponsored and co-presented by the John Keells Group through an unbroken patronage since 1994, Kala Pola has grown into a cultural landmark that continues to reshape how visual art is showcased and experienced in Sri Lanka. Remaining true to its founding philosophy, the event is proudly uncurated, providing participating artists and sculptors with the opportunity to showcase their talent, connect with art enthusiasts, learn from and network with other artists, and expand their clientele.

Kala Pola displays a broad variety of forms and styles, ranging from intricate sculptures, humorous caricatures, and abstract paintings to modern and traditional Sri Lankan art. Attracting art lovers, collectors, connoisseurs, and students from all parts of the country and tourists from various parts of the world, the event creates a vibrant, welcoming, and wholesome atmosphere spurred by music, camaraderie, art discussions, children’s art workshops, and an array of cultural performances.

As a longstanding and iconic visual art flagship amidst Sri Lanka’s vibrant calendar of arts and cultural events, Kala Pola continues to stand as a unique open-air platform for visual expression. By bringing together both established and emerging artists in an inclusive, uncurated setting in the heart of Colombo, the event fosters meaningful connections between creators and audiences, offering accessibility, diversity, discourse and a shared appreciation for art among a wide cross-section of the public, while spurring the creative economy of the country. Nations Trust Bank (NTB) also supports Kala Pola as its official banking partner.

Arts falls within the focus area of Social Health and Cohesion which is one of the four focus areas of John Keells Foundation (JKF) – the CSR entity of John Keells Holdings PLC (JKH), Sri Lanka’s largest listed conglomerate in the Colombo Stock Exchange operating over 80+ companies in 7 diverse industry sectors. With a history of over 150 years, John Keells Group provides employment to over 18,000 persons and has been ranked as Sri Lanka’s ‘Most Respected Entity’ for 20 Years by LMD Magazine. Whilst being a full member of the World Economic Forum and a Participant of the UN Global Compact, JKH drives its CSR vision of “Empowering the Nation for tomorrow” through JKF.

Solar industry warns of collapse due to CEB power curtailments

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.