35 years of transforming Sri Lanka’s digital landscape leads to the unveiling of FOUNDATION.LK

This year marks 35 years of registering domain names in .LK;; TechCERT has secured digital Sri Lanka for 20 years. — and this year marks anothermilestone with the launch of Foundation.LK.

FOUNDATION.LK is a not-for-profit initiative dedicated to empowering Sri Lankans with the knowledge, skills, and resources to navigate cyberspace safely and confidently—promoting responsible digital citizenship and unlocking opportunities in the evolving digital landscape.

Since 2009, LK DOMAIN REGISTRY, through its social empowerment initiatives, has equipped over 45,000 students, teachers, and principals across Sri Lanka with up-to-date ICT knowledge and skills. Its interactive e-learning platform, SuhuruSara, has empowered more than 10,000 learners through courses in web design, programming, and multimedia—delivered in local languages to broaden academic and career opportunities. Hithawathi – your confidante in Cyberspace – has empowered over 1.25 million netizens with vital cyber safety awareness, equipping them to navigate the digital world confidently and responsibly. It has also provided direct support to more than 10,500 individuals facing cyber-related challenges—making it a trusted lifeline in Sri Lanka’s digital safety landscape. Cyber Lowata Piyapath stands out as a successfully completed initiative which empowered 1,649 schools across 67 education zones to build their own websites, and equipped over 18,000 students and 2,100 teachers with essential digital literacy skills to thrive in the digital age. These initiatives will now be carried out by FOUNDATION.LK

Foundation.LK is committed to reaching underserved communities in Sri Lanka’s rural and remote districts, where limited access to digital skills training has widened the knowledge gap and limited opportunities in today’s tech-driven economy. To address this, SuhuruSara’s e-learning programs are widely accessible, offering courses in local languages that help learners—regardless of location—unlock academic and career potential. Hithawathi, the cyber safety awareness programme, equips citizens with essential digital safety knowledge, empowering them to navigate online platforms confidently and responsibly. Through its network of recognized centres, Foundation.LK bridges the digital divide by strengthening rural and semi-urban educational hubs with certified ICT courses, capacity-building programs, and digital awareness initiatives—empowering youth with the skills, access, and qualifications needed to pursue career opportunities both locally and globally.

HNB General Insurance ‘Celebrating Excellence 2025’ honours exceptional staff and top-tier sales achievers

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.