Aitken Spence Printing achieves historic milestone with WorldStar 2026 win for Sri Lanka’s offset printing industry

Aitken Spence Printing has achieved a landmark international recognition by becoming the first and only offset printing company in Sri Lanka to win an award at the prestigious WorldStar Awards, organised by the World Packaging Organisation (WPO). The Company secured the WorldStar 2026 Award for Packaging Excellence in the Luxury Packaging category, reaffirming Sri Lanka’s growing capability in world-class printing and packaging innovation.

The award was presented at the WorldStar Awards Ceremony in May 2026, in Düsseldorf, held alongside Interpack; the world’s leading trade fair for processing and packaging technologies, bringing together global industry leaders and innovators.

Widely regarded as one of the highest accolades in the global packaging industry, the WorldStar Awards are open exclusively to winners of recognised national or regional packaging competitions.

The World Packaging Organisation, a non-profit, non-governmental international federation, brings together packaging institutes, associations, corporations, and trade organisations from around the world under its mission of “Better quality of life through better packaging for more people.

Commenting on the milestone achievement, Deshantha Silva, Director / Chief Executive Officer of Aitken Spence Printing, stated: “We are immensely proud to receive a WorldStar 2026 Award, particularly as it represents the first recognition of its kind for an offset printing company in Sri Lanka. This achievement is especially meaningful as it comes during our very first participation at the WorldStar Awards. It reflects the strength of our adaptive manufacturing model and the dedication of our people, supported by advanced technology, process excellence, innovation, and environmentally responsible systems that consistently deliver exceptional value and quality to our customers.”

Over 200 models and 50+ designers audition for Sri Lanka’s first Women’s Fashion Week

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.