Sysco LABS Sri Lanka appoints Thushera Kawdawatta as its Managing Director

Sysco LABS Sri Lanka, the largest Global Innovation Center (GIC) of the world leader in food service, Sysco, has appointed Thushera Kawdawatta as its managing director, marking the start of a new era of growth and innovation.

Commenting on the appointment, Tom Peck, Executive Vice President & Chief Information and Digital Officer at Sysco, said: “We are proud to welcome Thushera to lead Sysco LABS Sri Lanka into its next phase of growth.”

“Thushera’s forward-looking approach to business and technology, and responsible AI adoption, aligns perfectly with our ambitions. Sysco LABS’ depth of expertise and engagement are integral to our global success, and this appointment underscores our continued commitment to Sri Lanka,” Peck said.

Thushera is an industry veteran with nearly three decades of experience who is recognized for his thought leadership in artificial intelligence, large-scale technology strategy and enterprise transformation. His career spans senior leadership roles at global and regional technology firms, including Virtusa, and as the founding CEO of Axiata Digital Labs. Most recently, he served as CEO and chief AI officer at COHEAD Therapeutics.

“I am excited to join Sysco LABS, where my vision is to harness Sri Lankan ingenuity to drive even greater value for Sysco,” said Thushera Kawdawatta. “Guided by our purpose of Connecting the World to Share Food and Care for One Another, I am committed to investing in our people and cultivating a thriving workforce that will use innovation and tech-driven mindsets to impact the global foodservice industry.”

“As our largest GIC, Sysco LABS Sri Lanka plays a pivotal role in advancing Sysco’s global technology strategy. Thushera’s technical expertise and people-first leadership style will strengthen our ability to scale capabilities, foster innovation and create an environment where top talent thrives,” said Lise Monahan, Sysco’s Vice President of Technology, Enterprise Solutions, Global Centers & OCIDO.

Siyapatha Finance unveils newest branch in the historic town of Mahiyanganaya

ComBank teams up with Lead Pro Education to broaden access to overseas study

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.