Students from Sri Lanka achieve top results in Outstanding Cambridge Learner Awards

The International Education group at Cambridge University Press & Assessment (Cambridge) is delighted to announce the winners of the Outstanding Cambridge Learner Awards in Sri Lanka. The awards celebrate the outstanding academic achievements of secondary school learners in Sri Lanka in the November 2023 and June 2024 Cambridge examination series.

Over 162 students in Sri Lanka will receive awards for exceptional performance in Cambridge IGCSE™, O Level and International AS & A Level examinations, including 3 students who achieved the highest marks in the world and 75 students who attained the highest marks in Sri Lanka in a single subject.

The Outstanding Cambridge Learner Awards programme celebrates the success of students taking examinations awarded by Cambridge International Education in over 40 countries around the world. Cambridge qualifications prepare and equip learners with the skills they need to thrive at university and beyond. The world’s best higher education institutions recognise Cambridge qualifications and value the critical thinking skills, independent research abilities and deep subject knowledge that Cambridge learners bring to university.

Vinay Sharma, Sr VP, Cambridge International Education (CIE) South Asia, said: “Cambridge learners are at the heart of everything we do. Every element of a Cambridge education – the curriculum, teaching and learning, resources and assessment – is carefully designed to help learners reach their potential and thrive in life.”

Dominic Hudson, British Council Exams Director, Sri Lanka, said: “Congratulations to students receiving Cambridge high achiever awards! They have shown great commitment and successfully applied knowledge and skills to achieve the highest results. UK qualifications are recognised worldwide and lead to greater opportunities. Parents and guardians will be proud of their child’s progress and can now celebrate after all the hard work.”

The awards also celebrate the achievements of those learners who have been recognised for ‘High Achievement’, based on outstanding performance in subjects which are not yet so widely taken in Sri Lanka, and learners who have achieved the total highest cumulative marks across a number of subjects. The winning students out-performed thousands of candidates worldwide who sat Cambridge examinations.

‘SL’s electricity unit cost remaining high compared to regional counterparts’

Eva and Sri Lanka Red Cross launch nationwide menstrual health campaign for schools

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.