Trump says US agreed to Iran’s request to continue talks, but ceasefire is over

(Reuters) - U.S. President Donald Trump said on Friday that Iran had asked to continue ​talks and the U.S. had agreed, but that the June ceasefire was "over".

His comments came after three Qatari and Saudi commercial tankers came under ‌fire this week, prompting the U.S. to hit Iranian sites, and Iran to respond with strikes on U.S. military installations in neighbouring Gulf states on Thursday. No attacks were reported on Friday.

"The Islamic Republic of Iran has asked us to continue 'talks.' We have agreed to do so, but the United States has stated to them, in no uncertain terms, that the Cease Fire is OVER!" he wrote in ​a post on Truth Social.

The two nations reached an interim deal last month to end a four-month conflict that has killed thousands and throttled worldwide energy ​supplies.

Qatari negotiators were meeting officials in Iran on Friday to seek to de-escalate tensions after the exchange of fire and to ⁠discuss navigation through the Strait of Hormuz, a source with knowledge of the situation told Reuters.

Daily tanker traffic through the critical waterway appeared to have slowed on Friday, after the ​series of attacks stoked concerns about the recovery of global oil supplies and shipping, and highlighted the fragility of the interim truce.

The Qatari talks in Iran aim to address ​the implementation of the U.S.-Iran memorandum of understanding and the issues that triggered the recent escalation, including disputes over navigation in the strait, the source said.

Iran's semi-official Tasnim news agency said a Qatari delegation visited Iran in an effort by Doha to consolidate its role as a mediator.

Oil prices eased on Friday but remained on track for weekly gains of 5% after the hostilities.

The Strait of Hormuz handled about a fifth of global oil supplies before the war. Tehran has since largely taken control of the waterway, ​forcing a stalemate in its confrontation with the world's most powerful military.

Under the interim deal, the U.S. ended its naval blockade of Iranian ports, and Iran agreed to ensure safe passage of ‌commercial vessels.