Field Marshal Fonseka’s military and political experiences continue to be invaluable assets: President

Acknowledges Yahapalana Govt.’s decision to honour Fonseka with title of Field Marshal

Field Marshal Fonseka attributes victory in war to collective effort of extraordinary dedication of war heroes

Expresses doubts on if former leaders honoured sacrifices made by both war heroes, people post-war

President Wickremesinghe yesterday expressed confidence in former Army Commander and MP Field Marshal Sarath Fonseka’s enduring commitment to the country and asserted that his military and political experiences continue to be invaluable assets.

He made these remarks during the launch of ‘The Army Commander’s Promise to the Nation – I Will Not Leave This War to the Next Army Commander’, a book authored by Fonseka. The event, held at the Nelum Pokuna Theatre in Colombo, celebrated Fonseka’s pivotal role in ending the country’s 30-year civil war.

President acknowledged Fonseka’s leadership was instrumental in securing victory in what he described as one of the world’s most challenging wars.

He said Fonseka’s perseverance through personal and political trials, including imprisonment and acknowledged the Government’s decision to honour him with the title of Field Marshal under former President Maithripala Sirisena’s administration.

The first copy of the book was ceremoniously presented to President Wickremesinghe by Field Marshal Fonseka. In recognition of his services, the President also received a commemorative gift from Fonseka.

Wickremesinghe lauded Fonseka for his extraordinary military leadership and resilience in the face of political challenges, affirming his continued potential to serve the motherland.

Highlighting Fonseka’s unique position as the only Field Marshal in the Sri Lankan Army, the President recounted his personal acquaintance with Fonseka, facilitated by General Cecil Vaidyaratne during the war. He commended Fonseka’s strategic acumen, especially during critical military operations such as the Jaffna Jaya Sikuru campaign, where Fonseka played a crucial role in stabilising the region after significant setbacks.

Speaking at the event Field Marshal Fonseka attributed the victory in the war to the extraordinary dedication of Sri Lanka’s war heroes, many of whom sacrificed their lives or became disabled in the process.

He expressed deep respect for the families of these heroes, acknowledging their sacrifices for the future of the nation’s children and the peace of the country.

Reflecting on the sentiments at the time, Fonseka noted that many advocated for a political solution to end the conflict.

Fonseka said when he assumed the role of Army Commander, he found the security personnel disheartened. However, their collective effort led to the victory in the 30-year war.

He emphasised that without the immense dedication and sacrifices of the soldiers, this victory would not have been possible.

Fonseka also expressed doubts about whether the previous leaders appropriately honoured the sacrifices made by both the war heroes and the people of Sri Lanka after the war.

The event was attended by various dignitaries, including religious leaders led by the Maha Sangharatna, Speaker Mahinda Yapa Abeywardena, Minister Nimal Siripala de Silva, MP Vajira Abeywardena, former Speaker Karu Jayasuriya, President’s Secretary Saman Ekanayake, Government officials, ambassadors, former army chiefs, and Anoma Fonseka along with other family members and invited guests.