Sri Lanka Banks’ Association congratulates new President, assures support for nation building

The Sri Lanka Banks’ Association (SLBA) has congratulated President Anura Kumara Dissanayake on his election to the Presidency and assured him of the fullest support of the banking sector for the challenging journey ahead.

In a congratulatory note, the Association, which represents all licenced banks in Sri Lanka, said: “The essential political and social stability that must be maintained is underpinned as always by the economy, and the banking sector is a lynch-pin in this structure. We understand, and are fully committed to, our role to ensure that financial stability is sustained.”

The full text of the SLBA note: “Please accept the warm congratulations of The Sri Lanka Banks’ Association (SLBA), which represents all licensed banks in Sri Lanka, on your election to the high office of the President of our nation.”

“On this occasion, the banking sector wishes to assure you of its fullest support for the challenging journey ahead under your leadership. The essential political and social stability that must be maintained is underpinned as always by the economy, and the banking sector is a lynch-pin in this structure. We understand, and are fully committed to, our role to ensure that financial stability is sustained.”

“As licenced banks under the supervision of the Central Bank of Sri Lanka, our members are bound by the highest standards of regulatory and ethical compliance, as they fulfill their obligations to all stakeholder groups, and we look forward to continuing to support our country’s progress, within these parameters.”

“We wish you and the Hon. Prime Minister every success in the journey ahead.”

Uber Eats promises to deliver ‘almost anything’ in Sri Lanka: launches campaign focussed on deliveries beyond food

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.