Kailash:The Mountain at the Centre of the World

After Mt. Everest, Mt. Kailash is the most celebrated mountain in the Himalayas. The name Kailash is derived from the Sanskrit kailasa meaning ‘crystal.’ It is 6,714 meters above sea level and some 2.000 meters above the surrounding plain. Despite its fame it is by no means the highest mountain in the Himalayas, not even the highest in the region. However, the absence of any high mountains in Kailash’s immediate vicinity gives it the impression of tremendous height and its unusually semi-symmetrically-shaped peak attracts and holds the attention.

The Kailash region is the source of four of India’s major rivers; the Indus, Sutlej (the easternmost tributary of the Indus), Brahmaputra, and the Ghaghara, a major tributary of the Ganges. In geographical lingo the Kailash region is “the hydrographic nexus of the Himalayas.” These features, together with its remoteness, the quality of the light due to the rarefied altitude, and the purity of the air, all combine to give Mt. Kailash and its environs a strangely beautiful, even a mystical aura. Those who have been there often attest that it is one of the most, and some say perhaps the most beautiful landscape on Earth. Ancient Indian authors never tired of eulogizing the mountain’s beauty. The Jatakamala describes it as “draped in rain-clouds hanging low and tinged with the hue of the twilight.”

After Kailash itself, the most spectacular mountain in its general vicinity is the 7,694 meter high Gurla Mandhata, known as Sudassana in Pali. According to Pali commentarial literature, Sudassana is one of the five mountains surrounding Kailash. It is also described as sloping downwards “like a crow’s beak” which is actually a rather good description of its western side.

No one knows when or how Mt. Kailash first came to the attention of the ancient Indians. The Vedas (1000-1500 BCE) mention a great mountain called Meru at the centre of the world, although this mountain probably existed only in the imaginations of the Vedic sages. But when the first Indians found their way up the Himalayan valleys, clambered over the highest snowy passes and found themselves on the edge of the Tibetan Plateau, they would have seen Kailash in the distance and quite understandably, they identified it with the mythical Mt. Meru.

The author after a snow storm, with Mt. Kailash on the horizon

It was these people, probably shepherds and wandering ascetics, who first brought back to India proper news about Mt. Meru/Kailash. But even then, the reality was always mixed with myth and imagination. Traditional Indian geography was always a strange amalgam of a few facts and a great deal of fantasy. But facts there are. At least as the Himalayas lie in Garhwal and Kumaon, there are actually seven ranges of mountains and ancient tradition says that Kailash is surrounded by seven rings of mountains. Many sources mention two lakes at the foot of Kailash which corresponds to reality too. But beyond these and a few other facts the rest is myth, or perhaps better, the result of eyes that see with faith and wonder.

Mt. Meru, also called Mahameru, Sineru, Neru, Kelasa and today Kailash, is often mentioned in the Pali Tipitaka, particularly in the Jatakas. In the Mahabhrata it is occasionally called Hemakuta and the Jains called it Athapada. In ancient Buddhist geography the Earth, was conceived as a disk “supported by space” (akasattha) and which rotated “like a potter’s wheel or the stone in an oil mill.” In the centre of this disk was Mt. Meru, the highest point on Earth and the meeting place of the four great continents (mahadipa or mahapathavi).

To the mountain’s north was the continent of Uttarakuru, to its south Jambudipa (i.e. India), on the east was Pubbavideha and to its west Aparagoyana. The two lakes near the foot of Kailash are Rakshastal and Manasarova. This second body of water was called Anotatta in the Tipitaka. Later sources say that India’s five great rivers all had their sources in Lake Anotatta and a wall painting at Dambulla Vihara depicts exactly this. The Buddha however, just said they all originate near each other but from different sources, which is actually correct. It is often the case with Buddhist literature that the older it is the more it is rooted in reality.

The name Anotatta means ‘not hot’ and refers to the belief that the mountains around the lake prevent the sun from ever shining on it, thereby making its water icy cold. The water of Manasarovar/Anotatta is indeed very cold although none of the nearby mountains really cast their shadow on it. The water of this lake has long been believed to be exceptionally pure and have curative powers. According to the Mahavagga of the Vinaya, just after his enlightenment, the Buddha used his supernormal powers to fly to Anotatta and bathe in its waters. Later legend says Mahamaya bathed in the lake after giving birth to the Prince Siddhattha. For centuries an essential part of the consecration ceremony for Indian monarchs included being sprinkled with water from the lake. The first king known to have been so sprinkled was the great Buddhist emperor Asoka Maurya. After Mahatma Gandhi’s cremation in 1947 a portion of his ashes were taken to Tibet and immersed in Manasarovar.

It is commonly said that Mt. Kailash is ‘sacred’ to Buddhists, Hindus and Jains, but this statement needs to be qualified as far as early Buddhism is concerned. According to the Buddha, going to “sacred mountains, trees or shrines” cannot impart any significant spiritual benefit (Dhamapada verses 188-92). Nonetheless, to the earliest Buddhists, Mt. Kailash was special because of its geographical placement and its extraordinary beauty and grandeur. Its perceived characteristics are sometimes used as a metaphor for the highest spiritual values. To have attained enlightenment was metaphorically described as having “touched great Meru’s peak.” The mountain’s immovability and equanimity were also seen as traits worthy of emulation. However, other characteristics the mountain possessed were considered less admirable. According to the Neru Jataka, it gave off a golden radiance that made all the animals living around it, noble and ignoble, appear to be the same. In other words, it lacked discrimination (avisesakara) and the ability to distinguish (navibhajati) between skillful and unskillful, good and bad, foolishness and wisdom.

In later centuries, Mt. Kailash came to be seen as the abode of bodhisattvas, gods and demigods. Later still in Tibetan Buddhism, a pilgrimage to the mountain was believed to have the power to purify the most negative kamma and if walked around 108 times, to lead to complete liberation. Like early Buddhism, the gentle ascetic faith of Jainism has always revered Mt. Kailash without attributing to it any power to save or liberate. The Jains revere Kailash as the centre of the Earth and the place where their first Tirthankara, the sage Rishabha, attained enlightenment.

For centuries Indian Buddhists, Hindus and Jains made pilgrimages to Mt. Kailash as did Tibetans after Buddhism became that country’s main religion in the 11th/12 centuries. After the Chinese invasion of Tibet in 1950 the Tibet/India border was sealed, and Tibetans were prevented from making the pilgrimage. Today it is possible once again to visit Kailash either as a pilgrim or a sightseer, although it is still a long and arduous journey. But those who do make it often say that they come away uplifted by the mountain’s majesty, moved by its spiritual associations, and enthralled by the vast and silent landscape surroundings it. Modern geography has dethroned Mt. Kailash as the centre of the world but it still attracts attention and reverence.

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.