Prime Group felicitates MAGA Engineering for successful completion of ‘The Grand’ project

Prime Group, the visionary force behind some of Sri Lanka’s most prestigious living spaces, today marked a significant milestone with the felicitation of MAGA Engineering, the main contractor for the ultra-luxurious residential project, ‘The Grand’ Ward Place, Colombo 07.

At a ceremonial gathering, Prime Group Chairman Premalal Brahmanage presented M. G. Kularatne, Chairman & Managing Director, MAGA Engineering, a retention payment, in accordance with ‘Sub Clause 11.8 of the Conditions of Contract’ certifying the Contractor had supplied all contractor documents, completed and tested everything to the satisfaction of the Engineer. With the successful completion of the contractual agreement, Prime Group also honoured MAGA Engineering for their outstanding work and dedication to excellence.

Premalal Brahmanage, Chairman of Prime Group and Sandamini Perera, Chairperson of Prime Lands Residencies PLC, commended MAGA Engineering, saying, “We extend our sincere thanks to MAGA for their stringent standards, work ethic and commitment to constructing ‘The Grand’. The solid relationship we established from the outset has been instrumental in realizing a seamless construction process and presenting a true architectural masterpiece to our valued clientele. Further, ‘The Grand’ is a testament that a project of any scale is possible with the right contractor and developer who share a deep mutual understanding and support each other. Prime Group is steadfast in our promise to consistently deliver beyond our customers’ expectations.”

People’s Bank celebrates 76 years of Independence by offering gifts to newborns

Prime Group unveils revolutionary 1% payment plan with ‘The Colombo Border’

Prime Group launches 43 By The Sea in Marine Drive, Dehiwala

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.