NTB renews long-standing partnership with Wildlife and Nature Protection Society of Sri Lanka

NTB Director and CEO Hemantha Gunatilleke (right) exchanges the agreement with WNPS General Secretary Rapti Dirckze

Nations Trust Bank (NTB) has renewed its partnership with the Wildlife and Nature Protection Society of Sri Lanka (WNPS), continuing the bank’s contribution to the WNPS and its environmental and awareness-building initiatives.

Environmental and biodiversity conservation is one of NTB’s key CSR initiatives. The WNPS continues to be one of the bank’s closest partners in offering its contribution to environmental conservation and building awareness.

One of the main initiatives supported by the bank in partnership with the WNPS is a series of monthly public lectures by environmental experts on topics ranging from climate action, biodiversity conservation and research, and other relevant topics pertaining to environmental sustainability. The initiatives cater to nature enthusiasts who are encouraged to participate in the free sessions.

NTB is also the main partner of the WNPS flagship magazine, ‘Loris’, and its publications, ‘Warana’ and ‘Waaranam’. The publications help facilitate greater public awareness on environmental issues and the ongoing contributions made directly by the WNPS through its various initiatives for biodiversity and environmental conservation.

NTB Chief Marketing Officer Sanjaya Senarath said: “We are pleased to continue our partnership with the WNPS as environmental conservation is one of NTB’s main focuses. We have a shared vision with the WNPS to promote ecological awareness by extending our support for their environmental initiatives. Together, we aim to help create a healthier and more sustainable ecosystem for future generations.”

WNPS President Graham Marshall said: “The WNPS monthly lectures serve as a dynamic platform for knowledge dissemination and community engagement. The impact is multifaceted, ranging from heightened awareness and informed decision-making to inspiring direct involvement in conservation initiatives. By addressing diverse topics and perspectives, these lectures contribute significantly to shaping more informed decisions in conservation matters. We appreciate the support extended by NTB over the last eight years.”