Multi Audio Visual concludes Allen & Heath Digital Audio Training Programme

Rob Clark, Managing Director of Allen & Heath UK, officially renews the authorized distribution agreement with Multi Audio Visual Pvt Ltd, handing over the agreement to Chairman Tilak Arunasiri

Multi Audio Visual Pvt Ltd, the authorised distributor for Allen & Heath products in Sri Lanka, recently conducted a successful Digital Audio Training Programme at BMICH.

The programme was aimed at enhancing technical expertise and professional standards of the local audio-visual industry.

This initiative saw a gathering of event production companies, sound engineers, music professionals, technical personnel, and Allen & Heath users for a comprehensive learning experience that focussed on advanced digital mixing technology.

The programme was designed to provide participants with practical, hands-on exposure to Allen & Heath digital mixing consoles through demonstrations, real-world audio applications and direct interaction with industry experts. Those in attendance were provided with an opportunity to gain deep insights into modern digital sound reinforcement techniques, and to explore the latest innovations in professional audio technology.

The sessions were focussed on practical workflow optimisation, digital mixing capabilities, live sound management and advanced console features, that are vastly becoming essential within modern event production and live entertainment environments. The hands-on format of the programme gave participants the opportunity to experience the performance, flexibility and reliability of Allen & Heath systems in real-time application.

Dilanka Ratnayake, General Manager of Multi Audio Visual Pvt Ltd highlighted the company’s commitment to supporting the evolution of the local professional AV industry through continuous knowledge-sharing initiatives and technical development programmes.

Tilak Arunasiri, Manging Director of Multi Audio Visual Pvt Ltd said, “At Multi Audio Visual, we believe that delivering world-class products alone is not enough. It is equally important to ensure that industry professionals have the technical knowledge and confidence to maximize the capabilities of these advanced systems. Through training initiatives like this, we aim to strengthen the local AV industry by providing direct access to global-standard technology, professional expertise, and reliable support services.”