Ethnicity – a ‘synonym’ for confusion

In homogenous language communities, it is not your awareness about the genes of your neighbour that makes you think of him as belonging to ‘your group’ – it’s simply the custom that labels any community of people speaking the same language as an ‘ethnic group’; actually they for a ‘language group’. The word ‘ethnic’ is superimposed. The problem with this unfortunate customary labeling is that you think of a community of people speaking another language as members of a different biological club of sorts.

Dr. N.A. de S. Amaratunga’s article titled “Ethnicity and genetics–A non-racial academic response” (The Island of December 11, 2024), which refers to Dr. Geewananda Gunawardena’s article titled “Agnotology and Ethnic Relations” (The Island– December 4, 2024), would surely have made the readers feel optimistic about more friendly relations between different ethnicities in Sri Lanka.

In his article Dr. Amaratunga writes, “Ethnicity is a social heritage and may be based on, not genes, but one or more of the following characteristics; language, religion and geographic location. Different ethnic groups may have very similar genomes. Similarly, there may be genetic differences within the same ethnic group”. This is quite informative and enlightening because it contributes to throw some light on the facts and myths about ‘ethnicity-based estrangement’, a socially constructed ‘reality’, which we have unsuspectingly continued to cultivate in various ways to our own disadvantage.

While not ruling out the possibility of genetic differences between ethnic groups, he questions our jealously guarded notions of ethnic particularity by pointing out that it’s not the genetic differences that pull apart people, but our social, cultural, linguistic and geographical differences, all of which are caught in a vortex of local and global power politics. He says “genetic composition of Israelis and Palestinians are very much similar, dating back to the Stone Age, but today they are arch enemies”.

How ironic and unfortunate! Hence, it is clear that our sense of closeness to or distance from our fellow travellers is hooked on nonbiological and external circumstances, i.e. language, religion, class, caste, geography, culture, education, last but not least, politics, and not on genetic differences. The last Parliamentary Election in Sri Lanka showed us how the so-called ethnic and religious affiliations could be decidedly made irrelevant by economic and political factors. This historic veering of loyalty flies in the face of everything we have been told about the so-called resilience of ethnic attachments.

Hopefully, any empirical evidence emerging to support a link between ethnicity and genetics is unlikely to further worsen our ethnic bias for two reasons. First, because it is so calloused that any scientific evidence simply will have little room for deterioration. Second, science and logic have no firm foothold in our instinctual and communal life unlike notions – be they based on facts, customs, delusions or myths – which get planted in our consciousness from our early years and strengthened over the years through repeated festivals, rituals, ceremonies, state-sponsored programmes, official authorisation (as in documenting of ethnicity in birth certificates), etc.

Unfortunately, cultural labeling has done enough damage to our otherwise humane relations with no support from empirical evidence, science or reason. Vital as they are for meaningful and decent relationships, science and logic don’t come to us with the same ease, grace and frequency that conventions and myths do, where all the formal and informal publicising needed are at their service dressed in ‘culture’. And, science and reason are not good playmates of all those that constantly shape our collective mind. Hence, the tools that can chip away at our ethnic ‘reality’ are the ‘social tools’ some of which have helped carve the fiend of ethnic bias in our minds so as to render it almost impossible to erase it with learning and reason in later years.

Many scholars including linguists, not forgetting politicians – would cherish language diversity for different reasons. However, diversity of language, unlike diversity of music and art, has done little to bring people together across various social, cultural and geographical borders. For example, we can enjoy songs sung in any language. We have no problems enjoying plays and movies where the language spoken may be unintelligible. However, this is not the case in real life when language is used to bridge the ‘information gap’, convey meaning, or simply to make sense.

Language is our most efficient tool of communication and it is that which has made all the difference between animals and the happy us. However, what about ‘languages’? While ‘language’ connects people, ‘languages’, in their multiplicity, have – yes, unintentionally- set them apart feeding into the myth that a different “mother tongue” is manufactured by a different biological factory; we don’t see it as something acquired as a result of being in a specific language environment in our early childhood.

Ethnicity is a concept which is kept alive in ways somewhat similar to the ways in which religion is kept glowing. There can be many biological differences between people whether they belong to the same ‘ethnicity’ or not. As we grow up, we learn many things which we were ignorant of as children. Today we are told that there are different blood groups and a person’s blood type is determined by a pair of genes, one from each parent (experts will set the record straight), but we have no communities labeled under different blood groups because we haven’t constructed a connection between language and blood type unlike the connection we have formed between language and ‘ethnicity’.

It is the language that is spoken by a community of people which enables us to label them with a so-called ‘ethnicity’, which is the same label given to the relevant language. So, we label those who speak Sinhala as Sinhalese, who speak English as English, who speak Tamil as Tamil and so on and thus have constructed unreal communities which draws from the myth that they are biologically distinct communities.

You don’t need to know whether they are genetically similar or different to classify them as similar or different in terms of stock; it is the language that does it with the help of custom, unwittingly. So usually, the members of a family, because they happen to speak the parents’ language, become the smallest unit of a so-called ‘ethnic community’, which is actually a ‘language community’ with any number of biological differences, which should undermine the link between ethnicity and genetics.

In homogenous language communities, it is not your awareness about the genes of your neighbour that makes you think of him as belonging to ‘your group’ – it’s simply the custom that labels any community of people speaking the same language as an ‘ethnic group’; actually they for a ‘language group’. The word ‘ethnic’ is superimposed. The problem with this unfortunate customary labeling is that you think of a community of people speaking another language as members of a different biological club of sorts.

Increased knowledge of science doesn’t make us bigoted. It is cultural conditioning which does the insidious job. Perhaps, that may be why we haven’t still started forming groups according to our blood types.

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.