Fifa chief sacked after criticism of Infantino’s World Cup sell-off plan

AUG.18 - The Fifa chief operating officer, Kevin Lamour, has been sacked after openly criticising Gianni Infantino’s ill-fated plan to sell parts of the World Cup to private investors.

In a significant development at the pinnacle of world football’s deeply troubled governing body, Lamour has departed less than two years after joining from a previous role at Uefa. He had come out strongly against Infantino’s FFE scheme after it was revealed, saying Fifa’s administration had been “deceived” and that the president “believes he embodies Fifa when he is supposed to be at its service”.

Lamour had also made clear that he would countenance losing his job as a consequence of opposing the plan, which was shelved hours after he spoke out on 31 July. “If that means I lose my job, then so be it,” he said in a statement. “I will understand and respect that decision. At least I’ll sleep well tonight.”

The precise circumstances of his sacking are unclear but the Fifa secretary general, Mattias Grafström, informed staff in an email that Lamour would be leaving the organisation.

A Fifa spokesperson said: “Fifa can confirm that the working relationship between Fifa and Kevin Lamour as Fifa’s chief operating officer has ended on 17 August 2026. Fifa thanks Kevin for his two years of service and wishes him the best of luck for the future. No further comment will be made on the matter.”

In the statement that appears to have expedited his departure, Lamour also said his colleagues “deserve better than contempt and intimidation”. He added: “My feeling is that we all want to be proud to work for Fifa, and today, unfortunately, it seems that is no longer the case for many of us.” On the same day one of Infantino’s senior advisers, Carlos Cordeiro, resigned in protest at Infantino’s proposals.

Lamour had been Uefa’s deputy secretary general before joining Fifa, and had first joined the European body in 2007. His departure is all the more eye-catching for his longstanding working relationship with Infantino, with whom he also worked at Uefa. Infantino continues to be under huge pressure after the failure of his scheme, with efforts to force his removal continuing. - TheGuardian