United Motors reports  Rs. 2.4 b profit for nine months

United Motors Group (UML) yesterday announced a robust financial performance for the first nine months of the financial year, ended 31 December 2025.

Year-to-date Group Profit after Tax (PAT) for the financial year stood at Rs. 2.4 billion, an increase of 5,315% compared to the same period last year. At the company level, United Motors Lanka PLC’s profit increased to Rs. 1.1 billion, a growth of 537% compared to the previous year.

Group revenue reached Rs. 33.3 billion year-to-date, compared to Rs. 7.9 billion in the prior-year period, reflecting an increase of 323%. Company revenue grew to Rs. 15.6 billion, up from Rs. 4.6 billion the previous year, representing a 236% increase.

With the import ban lifted, strong demand has been witnessed for the mid-range Mitsubishi SUVs and FUSO commercial vehicles, with pre-orders for future shipments. After sales performance has also been at its highest level in recent years, with a wide cross-section of vehicles utilising UML’s workshops across its nine island-wide locations. The launch of the New Mitsubishi Destinator (a 1.5-litre turbo 7-seater) in December is expected to continue bolstering performance in the coming quarters, considering the high demand and existing pre-orders.

At the subsidiary level, a key driver of performance was the Perodua range from Unimo Enterprises, catering to a wider market due to its entry level pricing. Performance in Q3 were further supported by an expansion of the Perodua model lineup, where the model range increased from three models/variations to six, including the Perodua’s new Ativa 1,000cc compact SUV. Over 300 units were sold in its first month of launch in the quarter.

Unimo’s newest venture into the Electric Vehicle (EV) and Range Extended Electric Vehicle (REEV) space is expected to add to the portfolio in the coming months.

In addition, Dutch Lanka Trailers (DLT) also made a significant contribution to the Group’s performance during the quarter. DLT continued to expand its global footprint, supported by strong international demand for its port trailers, further strengthening the Group’s performance in the quarter and in the nine months.