“Sky-high Sundowns by Marina Square”

Marina Square – Uptown Colombo announced the launch of “Sky-High Sundowns,” a series of exclusive investor forums aimed at exploring the dynamic real estate market of today and offering attendees a keen understanding of the pertinent factors at play in the current real estate investment landscape of the country.

The series was launched against the backdrop of the stunning ocean, Colombo harbour and city skyline views that the development is privy to at an event recently. Through the interactive discussions, show-arounds, and expert insights facilitated, attendees were afforded the opportunity to gain invaluable perspective for investors looking to maximise their returns and mitigate risks while staying ahead of the curve in the ever-evolving real estate sector.

“In an age where informed decisions are paramount, particularly due to the increasingly dynamic nature of the investment environment, we felt this was a pertinent time to launch this series. We steadfastly believe that an informed buyer makes the best decisions, and we hope this series will help investors navigate the intricate world of real estate investment with more confidence,” explained Mr. Kosala Wickramasinghe, Executive Director of Marina Square, speaking at the exclusive event.

Offering a forward-thinking approach and covering topics ranging from market trends and analysis to emerging opportunities, the event introduced Marina Square’s new InvestPro+ Payment Plan, a variation of the popular InvestPro Payment Plan, uniquely curated for the current investment market.

“From InvestPro to InvestPro+, we have always prided ourselves on keeping the investor at the forefront of our minds and offerings. The unique payment plan, requiring just a 15% down payment and interest-free instalments till end 2025, is our most flexible payment plan to date, solely considering the completion of 7 construction milestones, which included the completion of the superstructure. On offer for a limited time only, we believe this can truly make owning your dream home an investment for savvy investors ready to capitalise on the opportunity. And serves to further reinforce our commitment to empowering individuals to achieve their investment goals.”

With a new episode of the series planned for every month, “Sky-High Sundowns by Marina Square” promises to provide a platform for investors to connect, collaborate, and unlock exclusive new opportunities amidst the breathtaking sea and cityscapes.

Offering stunning views of the ocean, Colombo Harbour, and Skyline, Marina Square, which is scheduled for completion in December 2025, is located on a five-acre expanse and boasts 1088 condominiums across five towers of 36 floors, including two acres of open to sky gardens and recreational areas.

Sheraton Colombo Hotel welcomes guests to a new era of hospitality

Fresh buying interest in LOLC Group shares triggers bullish trend in bourse

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.