People’s Leasing & Finance honors top marketers at inaugural CEO Club event

People’s Leasing & Finance PLC hosted its inaugural “CEO Club” event at the iconic Taj Samudra Hotel in Colombo, on the 13th of June 2024. The occasion was a significant milestone, marking the company’s commitment to fostering a culture of excellence and investing in its people. CEO Club is an exclusive programme, launched for the first time, and aims to recognise and celebrate the company’s top performers.

The programme featured several exciting and competitive activities, held prior to the event, including an inter-branch competition designed to drive sales performance across various branches. The winners of the competition were awarded at the CEO Club event, receiving exciting prizes, including foreign tours, hotel packages, and a day out at Pearl Bay. Over 200 Top marketing professionals participated at the event, from across People’s Leasing & Finance’s Island wide branch network, highlighting the widespread engagement and competitive spirit within the organisation.

Discussing the initiative, Udesh Gunawardena, CEO of People’s Leasing & Finance PLC said, “Our inaugural CEO Club event not only celebrates the exceptional talent and dedication of our top marketers, it inspires the whole team to constantly reach for greater heights. This prestigious club is dedicated to recognizing and rewarding excellence, and I’m incredibly proud of the remarkable achievements of our team.”

The CEO Club event provided an excellent platform to acknowledge and reward the outstanding achievements of employees, making it a memorable and motivating occasion for everyone involved. It also provided an excellent opportunity for networking, fellowship and camaraderie amongst the company’s internal teams. This initiative is reflective of People’s Leasing & Finance PLC’s dedication to recognising talent and inspiring performance excellence within the organisation.

Open Market Sale Option and the protection of minority investors’ interests

Dialog offers unmatched convenience with eSIM, enabling effortless switching between iPhones & iPads

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.