Alumex takes quantum leap   with brand-new cutting- edge manufacturing facility ’Ascend’

Hayleys Chairman Mohan Pandithage (right), Director Sarath Ganegoda (second from left), and Alumex Managing Director Pramuk Dediwela (left) inspect a product at the new facility

Marking a milestone in its illustrious journey, Alumex PLC, a trailblazer in the aluminium extrusion industry, inaugurated its revolutionary ‘Ascend’ facility on 26 September in Sri Lanka, setting a new benchmark in production efficiency and technological advancement.

Strengthening its market presence, the new state-of-the-art facility embodies a giant step forward in Alumex’s commitment to innovation, quality, and sustainability in the aluminium industry – with new technologies including Aluminium High Pressure Die Casting (HPDC) and dedicated Aluminium Balcony Assembly Line machines.

Alumex PLC brings these advanced manufacturing capabilities to Sri Lanka to cater to specific requirements of overseas customers and attract new business opportunities from existing and new overseas markets.

The new Aluminium HPDC machine enables the production of complex aluminium components with optimised designs, high precision, and superior strength, offering a reliable method for producing high-quality metal parts efficiently. This technology serves diverse industries, including automotive, electronics, and construction, allowing for lightweight yet durable solutions. Its ability to create intricate shapes opens up new possibilities for product innovation while ensuring cost efficiency through streamlined and high-volume production.

The new Balcony Assembly Line offers large-scale production of premium, customisable aluminium balcony systems, designed for both residential and commercial projects in overseas markets. These systems promise durability, modern aesthetics, and superior product quality.

The new manufacturing facility will enable Alumex to ensure that every component produced with the new technology meets the highest global standards through relevant applicable testing standards and methods. This empowers Alumex to meet the growing demands of the export and local market with high precision and reliability. The company’s strategic vision and operational acumen have already led to the export of substantial volumes to international markets including Canada, USA, UK, Germany, Italy, New Zealand, Australia, and Singapore.

Alumex PLC Managing Director Pramuk Dediwela commented: “In this transformative era of Industry 4.0, Alumex PLC stands at the forefront of innovation, revolutionising the aluminium industry in Sri Lanka. This new state-of-the-art manufacturing facility showcases the latest technology, which will help not only to expand our product portfolio and offer value addition to customers, but also position Alumex as a beacon of excellence in the international market, driving economic growth and showcasing Sri Lanka as a hub of high-quality aluminium solutions.”