Pyramid Wilmar helps build next generation of professional chefs

25 young culinary enthusiasts receive scholarships to become professional chefs

Pyramid Wilmar, a leading name in the food manufacturing and marketing industry in Sri Lanka, successfully concluded its island-wide Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR) initiative, ChefsHunt, a comprehensive programme aimed at identifying, nurturing, and empowering young culinary talent across the country. The initiative was launched in collaboration with Sirasa Newsfirst, the Chefs Guild, and the National Apprentice and Industrial Training Authority (NAITA), in celebration of Pyramid Wilmar’s 20th anniversary.

Designed as a landmark initiative to contribute qualified professionals towards Sri Lanka’s foodservice industry, ChefsHunt culminated in a grand finale held at Stein Studios, Rathmalana, marking the successful completion of a three month long national programme.

Pyramid Wilmar is a trusted provider of high-quality food products and culinary solutions, serving households and foodservice professionals across the island. Committed to quality, innovation, and sustainability, the company drives excellence through strategic partnerships with chefs and industry stakeholders.

This program was conducted nationwide, across 10 selected locations from Jaffna to Colombo, and was aimed at school leavers aged between 18 and 25. It had over 1000 participants, out of which most talented were selected through an extensive evaluation process. They received a scholarship to pursue a culinary course at the M W Instiute of Culinary Arts which will qualify them to a receive an NVQ Level 4 Certificate.

The programme was designed to equip aspiring chefs not only with technical expertise, but also with critical competencies such as kitchen efficiency, food consistency, innovation, and professionalism—skills essential for sustainable career growth in today’s evolving culinary landscape. The programme aimed to bridge gap between talent and opportunity by providing access to mentorship, technical training, competitive platforms, and real-world industry engagement.

“Chefs are at the heart of our food culture,” said Thanveer Siddique, Director/Chief Operating Officer of Pyramid Wilmar. “With ChefsHunt, Pyramid Wilmar invested in the future of the culinary profession by creating opportunities for the next generation of chefs to showcase their talent, refine their skills, and gain exposure on a national stage.”

ChefsHunt stands as a significant corporate milestone for Pyramid Wilmar, delivering structured talent development. The program underscores the company’s commitment to purpose-driven CSR initiatives that contribute meaningfully to the advancement of Sri Lanka’s culinary sector, while leaving a lasting professional legacy for its participants.

National Educator Awards 2025 honours Sri Lanka’s outstanding educators across higher and general education

‘Turn your passion for technology into a globally recognised career’

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.