CTTA bestows Honorary Membership on Asia Siyaka Commodities’ Anil Randolph Cooke

In recognition of a remarkable career characterised by vision, leadership, and dedication, Anil Cooke was honoured as an Honorary Member of the Colombo Tea Traders’ Association at its 131st Annual General Meeting on 25 July, making him the 29th member to receive this honour in the modern history of the association.

This distinguished accolade reflects Cooke’s invaluable contributions over the years and enduring commitment to the growth and progress of the tea industry.

Cooke started his career in 1978 as a Trainee Tea Taster/Broker at Forbes and Walker. Due to his outstanding contributions in 1996, he was appointed to the company’s Board of Directors.

In 1998, together with a team of colleagues, he co-founded Asia Siyaka Commodities. He currently serves as the Managing Director of Asia Siyaka Commodities PLC, which has grown into a leading broking and logistics company in Sri Lanka and recently acquired AgriOne Solutions, an agri input specialist.

Beyond his role as a tea broker, he has made substantial contributions to the Colombo Tea Traders’ Association whilst representing the CBA in the CTTA Committee. His exceptional organisational skills for tea industry events resulted in him being appointed as a permanent member in the CTTA organising committee. He Co-Chaired the International Tea Convention held to celebrate the 130th anniversary of the CTTA in 2024 which was a resounding success.

Cooke played a key role in the CTTA competitiveness Initiative from 2016 – 2021 which transformed the Association and initiated many groundbreaking strategic Initiatives that brought together all stakeholders. He championed the CTTA/SLTB Specialty Estate Tea of the year competition and conducted the connected charity auctions in many countries around the world. A significant achievement was his involvement in the CTTA’s Steering Committee which swiftly transitioned the traditional “outcry” tea auction to an electronic platform. He chairs the Colombo Tea Traders’ Association’s Ceylon Tea Road Map 2030 Initiative and serves on Sri Lanka Tea Board, Ministry and CTTA committees.

Cooke has been Chairman of the Colombo Brokers’ Association, Director of the Sri Lanka Tea Board and committee member of the Colombo Tea Traders’ Association many times over the years. In 2022 the National Institute of Plantation Management awarded Cooke Honorary Membership of the Institute.

Worldwide acceptance of Cooke’s professional speaking skills on tea has made him a renowned speaker in international tea events. He is a certified international judge and Director of the World Tea Master Cup.

The CTTA recognises the contributions made by Anil Cooke to the tea industry by bestowing him with the “Honorary Membership of the CTTA”.