Wijeyadasa and Fonseka announce Presidential bids

Justice Minister Wijeyadasa Rajapakshe and Former Army Commander Field Marshall Sarath Fonseka yesterday officially declared their candidacies for the 2024 Presidential Election.

Holding a special press conference yesterday at the Independence Arcade, Rajapakshe 64 said he has decided to come forward as a candidate for the victory of Sri Lanka and its people. The Minister said the upcoming election was crucial for the nation’s future.

Blaming short-sighted policies for Sri Lanka’s ongoing economic crisis and poverty, Rajapakshe stated that, under his leadership, measures would be taken to resolve issues in several sectors, with a strong focus on development.

Rajapakshe emphasised the need for specialised banks for entrepreneurs, increased efficiency in the State sector, and regulation of the private sector. He highlighted the importance of maintaining good relations with all countries, prioritising neighbours.

Rajapakshe noted that he has already introduced a law to strengthen the bribery commission and signed a cabinet paper on the proceeds of crime bill. He said he has also taken steps towards national reconciliation.

”There is no bar against being a Minister and running for President,” he assured, expressing confidence that the Election Commission of Sri Lanka (ECSL) will act independently and in accordance with the Constitution in the upcoming elections.

The Justice Minister also revealed that 90% of the members of the Sri Lanka Freedom Party (SLFP) support his candidacy.

Separately Field Marshall Sarath Fonseka opted for a more low-key announcement. Fonseka who was recently ousted from the Samagi Jana Balawegaya (SJB) took to X to announce his Presidential bid, with a vow to crush corruption and boost the economy.

“I wish to announce my candidacy for the Presidency to the people of Sri Lanka,” Fonseka said in a post on X. “For 76 years, we have been led by an inept political group that has driven us to bankruptcy. For Sri Lanka to grow, we need to crush corruption. We need to leverage our natural resources to boost income generation. This is my formal and official announcement as the presidential candidate of Sri Lanka for the 2024 Presidential election.” he said.

Field Marshal Sarath Fonseka, 73 previously contested the 2010 Presidential election, where he was defeated by former President Mahinda Rajapaksa.