Club Hotel Dolphin by Browns Hotels & Resorts crowned

Club Hotel Dolphin, Waikkal, a standout property in the Browns Hotels & Resorts portfolio, proudly clinched the award for the Best 4-Star Resort in Sri Lanka at the prestigious 7th Sri Lanka Tourism Awards, organised by the Sri Lanka Tourism Development Authority (SLTDA). The accolade celebrates the resort’s exceptional contribution to Sri Lanka’s tourism industry and its commitment to delivering star-class hospitality infused with signature Sri Lankan warmth.

This year’s Sri Lanka Tourism Awards ceremony brought together industry pioneers, emphasising the importance of promoting sustainable growth, inclusivity and service excellence. At the awards ceremony, Thurashath Niyatapala, General Manager of Club Hotel Dolphin, accepted the prestigious honour on behalf of the entire team. The property’s dedicated staff were also present to celebrate the achievement, reflecting the team’s commitment to guest satisfaction and heartfelt service, which continues to set new benchmarks in the industry.

Commenting on the achievement, Eksath Wijeratne, CEO of Browns Hotels & Resorts stated:

“Being recognised as Sri Lanka’s best resort in its category is a true reflection of the resilience and dedication of our team. As the largest all-inclusive club operation by a Sri Lankan hotel company, we take pride in creating experiences that go beyond expectations. Through challenging times, we have stayed true to our promise of delivering vibrant energy, warm Sri Lankan hospitality and an immersive cultural connection. With an incredible team and a loyal base of repeat guests who return time and again, Club Hotel Dolphin remains a place where unforgettable memories are created. We will continue to raise the bar and redefine hospitality standards in Sri Lanka.”

lolc Insurance arm surges ahead with record-breaking performance in Q3 2024

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.