Sri Lanka drafting amendments to archaeology act to address shortcomings

ECONOMYNEXT — Sri Lanka has identified shortcomings in the Archaeology Act and is drafting amendments to rectify them, Justice Minister Wijeyadasa Rajapakshe said during a heated exchange in parliament.

The minister made this remark during an exchange that ensued between government and opposition members after Tamil-speaking MPs drew attention to what they claimed were a series of unlawful arrests.

The MPs were referring to an incident that saw the arrest of eight individuals over a Mahasivarathri festival organised at a temple in Vedukkunarimalai in Nedunkerny, Vavuniya. According to the MPs, the chief priest of the temple was among those arrested.

Police had made the arrests allegedly on a false accusation made by the Department of Archaeology of damaging historical monuments at the temple in question. According to media reports, the religious origins of the site are disputed, with both Buddhist and Hindu worshippers claiming it was built in the name of their faith. The Department of Archaeology, however, has declared it an ancient Buddhist site.

Tamil MPs staged a protest in the lobby of parliament against the arrest, demanding that the Inspector General of Police (IGP) Deshabandu Tennakoon summoned to explain the arrests, which Deputy Speaker Ajith Rajapaksha said parliament was not empowered to do.

Opposition leader Sajith Premadasa and opposition MP Lakshman Kiriella spoke in support of the protesting Tamil MPs, calling for religious freedom.

Tamil National Alliance (TNA) MP Charles Nirmalanathan claimed that the Department of Archaeology has filed a false case in court.

“Eight people were arrested after the Department of Archeology filed a false case. All eight must be released. That is our request,” he said.

“The court had ruled that a ceremony can be held there. The archeology department had claimed that the festival was damaging to the archaeology. Would we damage our own gods?

Justice Minister Rajapakshe responded that an impartial inquiry will be held upon which information will be submitted to court.

“If we say we’re going to release those eight people, then it means we’re doing the court’s work. You will then turn around and ask where the rule of law is in this country. So we’ll conduct the investigation and report,” said Rajapakshe.

Once an arrest has been made under the Archaeology Act, the minister said, magistrates don’t have the authority to issue bail.

“They should go to the court of appeal to seek bail. We have identified many shortcomings in the archaeology act and we’re in the process of formulating amendments. It is not fair that you’re interpreting this was discriminatory against a particular religious group,” he said.

Tamil Buddhism in Sri Lanka: A study in historical expedienceSee more