Pan Asia Bank powers ‘Dear Father’

As the world celebrated International Women’s Day on 8th March 2024, Pan Asia Bank was pleased to support a national level initiative called ‘Dear Father’, initiated by the Department of Samurdhi Development, Rotary Club of Colombo Uptown and Women’s International Foundation (WIF), promoting meaningful engagement, financial literacy in advancing social empowerment of men, and gender equality and women’s empowerment. The program promoted and facilitated the active participation of fathers while highlighting their crucial role in championing women’s holistic empowerment and accelerating their progress.

Expressing his enthusiasm about the program, Buddhika Perera, AGM – Deposit Mobilization of Pan Asia Bank said: “As the Truly Sri Lankan Bank, Pan Asia Bank is committed to uplifting Sri Lankan lives beyond Banking. We are proud to take part in Creating Change Agents in the Samurdhi Network who will go on to make a further impact in society. We believe Financial Literacy is a key aspect of any successful society and we were happy to accept the invitation to take part in this since we have expertise in building Financial Literacy amongst communities.”

C.D. Kaluarachchi, Director General of the Department of Samurdhi Development, reaffirmed his support for the initiative: “’Dear Father’ is a timely and nationally significant program. We are cautiously but steadily implementing this program to guarantee that the desired impact is achieved. The Department of Samurdhi Development, along with our partners, is completely dedicated to the program’s success.”

Adding further, Jerome Rajendram, District Governor Rotary International, District 3220, Sri Lanka and Maldives said: “We believe that true gender equality and women’s empowerment requires the active participation and support of men – and “Dear Father” is doing just that. We are very happy and proud to champion this initiative.”

Microsoft joins hands with Sri Lanka in its journey to becoming unstoppable with AI

Pearson unveils PTE Core English exam suite and recognizes its key agents

Pan Asia Bank joins hands with AIA Insurance to bring world-class protection, health and investment coverage to its valued customers

Pan Asia ‘Ezy Banking’ spaces in branches to enhance customer digital experience

Committing to empower entrepreneurship, Pan Asia Bank celebrates New Year

Amazing savings up to 75% for Pan Asia credit/debit Cardholders this festive season

Pan Asia Bank customers to receive next-level experience with the new customer onboarding platform by LinearSix

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.