Amana Bank champions knowledge sharing and student development at Wayamba University

Amana Bank Head - Knowledge Marketing and Financial Inclusion, Muath Mubarak, along with the Symposium Chair and WUSL Head - Banking and Finance Department, presenting the Runner-Up prize of the Inter-Department Debate Competition to the winning team.

Amana Bank reinforced its commitment to knowledge sharing through its active engagement at the 2nd Symposium in Banking and Finance (SyBFin-2025) organised by the Department of Banking and Finance of the Faculty of Business Studies and Finance at Wayamba University of Sri Lanka. The Bank contributed to the event’s academic discourse through participation in the technical deliberations and by supporting initiatives designed to elevate student learning and professional readiness, including the Inter-Department Debate Competition.

A key highlight of the Bank’s involvement was its representation on the technical panel themed “Economic Resilience and Stability, Financial Markets & Services, and Innovative Technologies for Finance.” The session brought together industry practitioners and academics to explore emerging dynamics shaping the financial sector, fostering a deeper understanding of market transformation, regulatory evolution, and technology driven innovation. Amana Bank was represented in the panel by its Head of Knowledge Marketing and Financial Literacy Muath Mubarak.

Sharing his reflections on Amana Bank’s participation, Vice President – Retail Banking and Marketing, Siddeeque Akbar stated that “Engagements of this nature allow us to contribute real-world perspectives to the academic environment while also gaining valuable insights from the next generation of financial professionals. As the industry continues to evolve, it is essential that both practitioners and academics collaborate to cultivate talent capable of driving intelligent, ethical, and sustainable financial innovation for the country.”

Highlighting the value of industry collaboration, Wayamba University of Sri Lanka, Department of Banking and Finance Head, A.G.D.L.K. Gunaratna, added: “The involvement of institutions like Amana Bank significantly enriches the learning ecosystem of our students. Their contribution to the technical discussions and student engagements helped bridge theoretical knowledge with practical application. We deeply appreciate this meaningful partnership, which strengthens our collective efforts to prepare professionals for the future of finance.”

Through its continued engagement with higher-education institutions, Amana Bank remains committed to advancing academic development, fostering innovation, and contributing to the long-term resilience and competitiveness of Sri Lanka’s financial sector. As part of the Central Bank’s National Road Map on Financial Literacy, Amana Bank completed 80+ Financial Literacy programs in 2025 catering to an audience in excess of 10,000 including, students, professional, traders, SMEs, business leaders and women entrepreneurs.

Amãna Bank PLC is a stand-alone institution licensed by the Central Bank of Sri Lanka and listed on the Colombo Stock Exchange with Jeddah-based IsDB Group being the principal shareholder of the Bank. The IsDB Group is a ‘AAA’ rated multilateral development financial institution with a membership of 57 countries. Testifying its position as a leading practitioner of the non-interest based banking model, Amãna Bank was recognised amongst the Top 50 Strongest Islamic Bank’s in the World by The Asian Banker. Amãna Bank does not have any subsidiaries, associates, or affiliated institutions apart from its engagement with OrphanCare as its Founding Sponsor.