Marriott International and CG Hospitality Global sign multi-unit agreement to open 3 properties across India and Nepal

Marriott International’s Chairman of the Board David Marriott (third from right) and CG Corp Global and CG Hospitality Chairman Dr. Binod K. Chaudhary with the agreements signed along Managing Director and CEO Rahul Chaudhary (left)

These signings deepen strong collaboration between the two companies, marking a significant step in expanding their luxury and premium hospitality footprint including The Ritz-Carlton in Kathmandu

Adds nearly 450 keys to the company’s portfolio including 150 elegantly appointed guest rooms, including 30 expansive suites at Ritz-Carlton

Westin Kathmandu and JW Marriott Hotel Siliguri are the other properties

Marriott International, Inc. signed a landmark agreement with CG Hospitality Global to open three new hotels in South Asia, introducing Marriott’s industry-leading luxury and premium hotel brands to key urban, economic and leisure destinations across Nepal and India.

Anticipated to open in 2031 and adding nearly 450 keys to the company’s portfolio, The Ritz-Carlton Kathmandu, The Westin Kathmandu and JW Marriott Hotel Siliguri are poised to become coveted addresses for discerning travellers and residents.

CG Hospitality Global is Nepal’s largest and most diversified multinational conglomerates, with interests spanning hospitality, FMCG, financial services, cement, electric vehicles, telecom, education, infrastructure and real estate, amongst others. Headquartered in Nepal, the company is deeply committed to supporting the country’s long-term tourism and economic growth, while helping position Nepal as a globally recognized travel and hospitality destination. CG Hospitality Global shares a strong and growing association with Marriott through multiple hospitality developments across the region, reflecting a shared commitment to expanding world-class hospitality experiences in South Asia.

This multi-property agreement was officially signed in the presence of Marriott International’s Chairman of the Board David Marriott, CG Corp Global and CG Hospitality Chairman Dr. Binod K. Chaudhary, and Managing Director and CEO Rahul Chaudhary.

Marriott International President, Asia Pacific excluding China Rajeev Menon and Marriott International Senior Vice President South Asia Kiran Andicot said: “We are pleased to deepen our association with CG Hospitality Global through a shared vision to bring world-class hospitality experiences to these high-potential markets” said Rajeev Menon, President, Asia Pacific excluding China, Marriott International.  “These landmark developments reflect the exceptional standards and brand excellence that define Marriott’s luxury and premium portfolio, while contributing meaningfully to tourism growth, local employment and regional economic development. Backed by CG Hospitality Global’s strong market expertise and long-term commitment to Nepal, we are confident these hotels will emerge as defining hospitality destinations in the region”.

CG Hospitality Global CEO and Managing Director Rahul Chaudhary said: “Growing our relationship with Marriott International marks an exciting new chapter in our journey to elevate South Asia’s hospitality landscape. These signings signifies the importance that both parties put in this collaboration, and we sincerely thank Marriott for their trust, collaboration, and shared vision as we embark on these landmark projects together. Together, we will create iconic destinations that celebrate local culture, unlock meaningful employment, and deliver exceptional experiences for travelers and communities.”

The Ritz- Carlton, Kathmandu, Nepal: Marking the brand’s debut in Nepal, The Ritz-Carlton, Kathmandu will bring its legendary service and refined aesthetic to one of the city’s most prestigious addresses. Anticipated to feature 150 elegantly appointed guest rooms, including 30 expansive suites, each space will be thoughtfully designed to offer a sense of understated luxury and sophisticated comfort. The property is also expected to feature the Ritz-Carlton Club signature, exquisite dining experiences across five distinct restaurants and bars, an outdoor swimming pool, fitness center, as well as The Ritz-Carlton Spa. Additionally, it is slated to feature over 1,100 square meters of well-equipped conference and event facilities, providing an ideal venue for corporate gatherings and social occasions. The hotel will offer excellent accessibility, located just 5 km from the Tribhuvan International Airport and just a short walk from cultural sites such as the famous Thamel, filled with local eateries and retail shops, The Narayanhiti Palace Museum, Kathmandu Durbar Square, Swayambunath Stupa and the revered Pashupatinath Temple.

The Westin Kathmandu, Nepal: Located at a convenient 7 km from the Tribhuvan International Airport, The Westin Kathmandu is expected to feature 150 premium rooms and suites. Plans for the property include three dining venues, a WestinWORKOUT® Fitness studio, the signature Heavenly Spa by Westin, a rooftop swimming pool and over 700 square meters of flexible meeting and banquet space, enhanced with natural light and smart technology. The hotel is poised to exemplify the brand’s position as hospitality’s global leader in wellness, allowing travellers to transcend the rigors of travel while on the road through its pillars of well-being: Sleep Well, Eat Well and Move Well.

JW Marriott Hotel Siliguri, India: Rooted in mindful luxury, JW Marriott Hotel Siliguri, is envisioned as a serene sanctuary for the mind, body, and spirit, bringing the brand’s signature warmth, intuitive service, and refined design to the tranquil landscape of Siliguri. Set against the foothills of the Himalayas, in a city known as the gateway to Northeast India, the hotel offers a seamless connection to both place and purpose. Design plans for the hotel include 150 thoughtfully designed guest rooms and suites, alongside wellness spaces that invite guests to pause and reconnect with the present. Immersive culinary experiences will come to life across four distinct dining venues, including a specialty restaurant. Additionally, the property is slated to offer a signature Spa by JW, an outdoor swimming pool, a fully equipped fitness centre and 1,500 square meters of banquet space, ideal for corporate meets and private celebrations. Conveniently located just 10 kilometers from Bagdogra Airport, the hotel will serve as a restorative retreat, balancing effortless access with a profound sense of calm.

The three-property signing is the latest in a series of milestones reflecting the growing association between Marriott and CG Hospitality Global, including recently celebrating 75 total signings and 50 open properties for Series by Marriott in under two years. Outside of India, CG Hospitality Global and Marriott also opened The Farm at San Benito, Autograph Collection in the Philippines, marking the debut of the Autograph Collection brand in the country, while CG Developers announced JW Marriott Residences at Dubai Islands, Central, Dubai’s first JW Marriott branded residences.

These milestones reflect the growing momentum of Marriott and CG Hospitality’s relationship and reinforce a collaboration that continues to deepen across a range of markets and brands especially through the Series by Marriott.