CSE and USAID hold Issuer Forum in the Southern Region, educating SMEs

The Colombo Stock Exchange (CSE) and the United States Agency for International Development (USAID) collaborated on a forum to provide small and medium sized enterprises (SMEs) in southern Sri Lanka with insights into opportunities to raise capital through the CSE.

Held recently at the Weligama Bay Marriott Resort & Spa, the issuer forum titled “Redefining the Trajectory of Your Business”, provided guidance on exploring effective capital-raising avenues, specifically through listing on the Empower and Diri Savi Boards, which offer dedicated listing platforms for SMEs, focusing on sectors like agribusinesses, livestock, energy generation, ICT, and tourism-related ventures. Industry experts, investment advisors, CSE representatives, and representatives of USAID’s CATALYZE Sri Lanka Private Sector Development Activity led panel discussions and interactive sessions.

“USAID’s goal for SMEs is to unlock opportunities for growth, innovation, and sustainability, paving the way for economic development that benefits everyone,” said Dennis Wesner, deputy director of USAID’s office of Economic Growth. “Forums like this are important for educating SMEs about the available capital resources.”

Addressing the gathering, Rajeeva Bandaranaike, CEO of CSE, said, “The decision to pursue a listing on the stock exchange marks a significant milestone in the life of any company. Going public is not just about raising capital or enhancing liquidity—it’s about unlocking potential, fuelling innovation, and creating value for shareholders, employees, and society at large. It will be a transformative path which starts with a fundamental shift in mindsets.”

Conducting a session on ‘Capital Mobilization through the CSE’, Niroshan De Silva, Assistant Vice President of Research, Capital Alliance Limited, stated, “Sri Lankan SMEs are the backbone of our economy, but many face challenges in accessing growth capital. Listing on the Colombo Stock Exchange (CSE) provides a unique opportunity to address this very need. By going public, SMEs can tap into new sources of capital, allowing for significant expansion and innovation.”

He went on to say, “The CSE also facilitates price discovery, providing a fair market value for existing investors. Additionally, the listing process fosters good corporate governance practices, building trust and transparency for all stakeholders. In short, a vibrant SME sector on the CSE will benefit not only the businesses themselves, but also the Sri Lankan capital market by fostering innovation, diversification, and a culture of strong corporate governance.”

The forum featured a panel discussion titled “Journey Towards Listing & Life after Listing” including Jude Fernando, Inclusive Finance Director, PSD; Chamara Dissanayake, Executive Director, Asia Siyaka Commodities Limited; Rajeeva Bandaranaike, CEO, CSE; Niroshan De Silva, Assistant Vice President, Research, Capital Alliance Limited and with Punyamali Saparamadu, Senior Vice President, Commercial, CSE, serving as the moderator.

The Weligama session follows similar presentations held in Colombo and Jaffna. Attendees reported finding the discussion valuable for its insightful perspectives.

Related Topics:The Colombo Stock ExchangeUnited States Agency for International Development

Food truck to restaurant chain: How Uber Eats helped Street Burger thrive

CSE partners with SLIM to promote capital market education among students

US Embassy video chronicles 75 years of people, partnership and progress through USAID

SLING Mobility and USAID collaborate to propel sustainable E-Mobility and clean energy in Sri Lanka

CSE to introduce regulated short selling through stock borrowing and lending to enhance trading opportunities

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.