JKCG Auto unveils DENZA

John Keells CG Auto, Sri Lanka’s leading sustainable mobility brand and the authorized distributor for DENZA in Sri Lanka, announces the upcoming launch of the luxury electric vehicle brand with over a decade of innovation excellence. DENZA is set to bring refined elegance and luxury to Sri Lankan drivers through its premium New Energy Vehicle (NEV) offerings.

Pre-bookings for DENZA are now live, ahead of the brand’s upcoming official launch. Ideal for customers seeking quiet luxury and intelligent, high performance NEVs, the announcement marks another significant milestone in Sri Lanka’s automotive industry, and for JKCG Auto’s continuing mission to accelerate Sri Lanka’s sustainable mobility transition.

DENZA’s Sri Lankan portfolio features three distinct luxury models designed for different customer preferences. The DENZA D9 offers premium family transportation as a luxury electric MPV, while the DENZA B8 and B5, an adventurous plug-in hybrid, cater to customers seeking high-performance mobility with advanced safety and technological features.

Each model in the DENZA lineup represents the brand’s unwavering commitment to delivering exceptional build quality, innovative technology, and the refined luxury experience that defines premium electric and plug-in hybrid vehicles.

“Ever since BYD entered Sri Lanka, it has quickly become the island’s most popular NEV brand, reflecting the unmatched value we deliver in performance and the overall driving experience. With DENZA, we are elevating that promise into the luxury segment. Sri Lanka joins a select group of international markets including Singapore, the UK, and Hong Kong in offering DENZA, and we’re incredibly proud of this achievement”

ASPI exceeds 22,000 point mark as bourse’s bullish exuberance continues

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.