Nobel Peace Committee decides wisely as fragile Mid-East truce takes hold

Hopefully it would be a sobering moment for US President Donald Trump, the self-proclaimed Nobel Peace Prize winner this year. Whereas Trump prematurely and vaingloriously declared that the Prize was his, the Nobel Committee decided otherwise and chose Venezuelan opposition leader Maria Corina Machado as the winner of the coveted award and very rightly.

It is far too early to say whether peace has finally dawned in the Gaza in particular and in the Middle East in general. The mere ceasing of fighting does not necessarily translate into peace, which has a far more profounder and substantive meaning than a cessation of hostilities. Generally, peace denotes permanent reconciliation or a forgiving of each other by adversaries, besides a downing of arms.

The moment of forgiving, moreover, arrives when former adversaries admit to wrongs committed against each other, seek to be forgiven and work towards fostering a spirit of brotherhood and mutual understanding between them. This in essence, is Truth and Reconciliation; a process which was boldly explored for the first time in modern history by post-apartheid South Africa.

It is plain to see that President Trump’s ‘peace’ overtures have come nowhere near Truth and Reconciliation, correctly understood.

Besides, peace as defined here cannot be achieved at gun-point, so to speak. That is, adversaries cannot be coerced into making peace. They need to be convinced of the merits of being reconciled with each other and of being united in a spirit of brotherhood. Needless to say, this is a long term project. It indicates a converting of hearts and minds to the cause of reconciliation and this involves talking to each other’s hearts and minds sincerely. It is fundamentally a political process.

President Trump has done none of the above in his ‘peace’ efforts in the Middle East or in those seven or so wars he claims to have brought to a close. Instead, in the case of the Middle East, he is on record that ‘all hell would break lose’ in the region if the fighting did not end. That is, the seeming cessation of hostilities in the Middle East was brought about as a result of Trump threatening to use force on the antagonistic groups to end the fighting. Accordingly, we are nowhere near peace in the region in the truest sense.

On the other hand, Machado remained within a political or democratic process as she opposed, against mighty odds, the repressive regime in Venezuela. It was not a case of taking to arms against the rulers of Venezuela and of answering ‘fire with fire’. Democratic means were adopted in the main by the opposition leader in her efforts to disempower the rulers of Venezuela. Peace was not sought at ‘gun-point’. By bestowing the Peace Prize on Machado, the Nobel Committee has fully endorsed the political or democratic path to peace.

At the time of writing, Hamas fighters are reportedly back in the Gaza in what seems to be a show of force and this development alone points to the fragility of the ‘peace’ that is believed to be upon the Gaza. Moreover, the killing of some five Palestinians by the Israeli security forces in Gaza City indicates that stable law and order measures are yet to take hold in the region. These events would hopefully set the US President thinking on the issues at the heart of peace in the region.

That the Trump regime is yet to get its priorities right in the Middle East is established by the US President’s preference for the ‘re-building’ of the Gaza over other considerations. While the ‘re-building’ of the Gaza needs to get underway, it ought to be ideally accompanied by a peace dialogue among all concerned for the fostering of reconciliation among the principal foes.

As matters stand, the rebuilding of the Gaza would probably take years, considering that some 80 percent of the region has been devastated by war. Meanwhile, there ought to be peace among the communities and the path to peace is continuing dialogue among the quarters concerned and the stabilization of a peace culture in the region. The US then has its work cut out.

The road ahead in the Middle East is accordingly rocky and the US would need the assistance of its Arab allies in the region to ensure that there would be no serious setbacks to the 20 point plan that it has drawn up. From this viewpoint, the help of Turkey and Iran would prove crucial. While militant groups such as Hamas are unlikely to say ‘yes’ to an immediate downing of arms, some convincing by Turkey and Iran could enable them to do so.

However, the ideal approach, as pointed out in this column previously, should be to induct the Palestinian militant organizations as well into the peace process. That is, they should be made stakeholders to the peace dialogue. Failing to do so would amount to jeopardizing the normalization effort.

Meanwhile, the Israelis too need to be made full stakeholders to the peace effort. It is up to the US to ensure this and guarantee that the best interests of the Palestinians would be fully realized. A ‘trigger-happy Israel’, it ought to be plain, could take the Middle East on the path of wasting bloodshed and ruin once again.

Thus far, just two aims in the ‘20-point’peace plan have been achieved; that is, the exchanging of hostages and the shoring-up of a ceasefire. The greatest degree of statesmanship and honesty, along with almost unlimited ‘staying power’, is required of all quarters concerned, to ensure the implementation of the rest of the points in the plan. That it should be so, is likely to be the wish of the supporters of a stable peace and of democratic opinion.

A grueling personal challenge awaits President Trump as well amid these uphill tasks for the future. He would have to stay the course and ensure that a substantial peace is fostered and stabilized in the Middle East. He cannot afford to allow a waning of personal interest in a permanent peace now that he has not clinched the Nobel Peace Prize. President Trump’s continued and unwavering interest in peace is also a great imponderable in the Middle East.

From Jamalpur to the record books: Shorna lights up Bangladesh

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.