Sri Lanka’s economic comeback faces its first test as debt fears rekindle

First Capital Holdings PLC, a subsidiary of JXG (Janashakthi Group) and a pioneering leader in Sri Lanka’s investment landscape, successfully hosted the highly anticipated 12th Edition of its First Capital Investor Symposium on 22nd January, at Cinnamon Life, Colombo.

During the Symposium, First Capital presented its economic outlook for Sri Lanka in 2026, highlighting both growth prospects and plausible vulnerabilities. A central finding was the anticipated softening of Sri Lanka’s GDP growth, projected to decrease from 5.0% in 2025 to 3.0-4.0% in 2026. The main reason for this expected slowdown is the impact of the recent Cyclone Ditwah. The damage from the storm leads people to spend less, especially in areas beyond the main Western province, which affects the economy. While Sri Lanka’s fiscal resilience and fundamental discipline, a trend since 2023, are anticipated to remain robust, the need for higher capital expenditure in post-Ditwah revitalization efforts creates challenges. The main point of concern is that with slower economic growth, it could become more challenging for Sri Lanka to continue making good progress on managing its national debt.

Concurrently, the symposium’s discussion spanned interest rate movements, exchange rate trends, and bond market developments. The event also provided a unique platform for investors, industry leaders, and experts to engage in critical discussions on the market forces that are shaping Sri Lanka’s economic future. Drawing over 300 invitees and 400 participants online, the event proved to be one of the largest and most influential investor gatherings in the country, further consolidating First Capital Holdings’ leadership in fostering economic discourse and empowering investors with strategic insights.

Stepped-up bid to attract more young talent to the world of hospitality

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.