Sri Lanka denies $10mn election funding by VFS Global over visa deal

ECONOMYNEXT – Sri Lanka’s Public Security Minister Tiran Alles denied that VFS Global, a company linked to the island’s high priced visa fee controversy, had made a 10 million dollar campaign contribution for upcoming elections.

“I saw something that VFS had given 10 million dollars for President Wickremesinghe’s election campaign,” Minister Alles told reporters Monday.

“I also saw today that Sajith Premadasa had demanded money to stop talking about it. These are both wrong.

“Doing these things will not help the country. I am asking to tell the truth to educate the public.

“I do not take even 5 cents from anyone. The people in the country know that.”

Premadasa in an x.com post on May 04 alleged that the “only logical explanation is absolute corruption” for the visa deal.

Sri Lanka’s 50 dollar visa fee went up to 100 dollars with the shift to IVS-GBS-VFS Global, a private contractor, which is also operating a complicated online interface, seeking twitter handles of tourists.

The private firm is charging an 18.5 dollar fee on top of the government charge, and a 5 to 7 dollar ‘convenience fee’ on top of that.

Opposition legislator Harsha de Silva, who is also chair of the Committee on Public Finance, has called for a parliamentary investigation to find out how the fees the monopoly is charging are arrived at.

Sri Lanka opposition calls for investigation into IVS-VFS Global tourist visa monopoly profitsSee more

The 18.5 dollar fee adds up to about 40 million dollars for the projected 2.3 million tourists for 2024, and the convenience fee another 11 to 12 million dollars, depending on how many South Asian visitors come who get a cheaper visa.

However the travel trade has warned that the visa fees are higher than competition in East Asia.

Related Sri Lanka may miss tourism target over IVS-GBS-VFS visa fees, complex forms, President told

The earlier 50 dollar fee was also higher than several East Asian countries, but the website was extremely user friendly and was described as painless in top travel reviews. (Colombo/May06/2024)