US breaching OCC agreements with Sri Lanka: ex-President

ECONOMYNEXT – The United States is breaching the Official Creditor Committee agreements by making it difficult to repay creditors by imposing sudden tariffs on the country, ex-President Ranil Wickremesinghe has argued.

“The US is a member of the OCC,” he told a forum organized by Advocata Institute to introduce Policy Challenges of Globalisation in Sri Lanka, a book written by Sarath Rajapatirana, former World Bank official who been a Presidential advisor.

“And U.S. has signed on to the GFN (gross financing need) at their time limits (in a debt sustainability assessment done with the IMF), which means they must help us now.”

“They are in breach of the agreement. They are preventing all that, from us repaying repay the bondholders.

“We have to tell the IMF tell the bondholders to go to the U.S. and collect the money.”

Without only promising to “buy Coca-Cola” or gas, Sri Lanka should push home the point that the US signed on to the OCC, he said.

President Wickremesinghe said he hoped the current administration will succeed in getting the Trump tariff down as Sri Lanka “cannot survive with 30 percent”.

Official and private creditors accepted the debt sustainability assessment and targets and gave relief on the basis that they were reasonable and achievable.

However Sri Lanka is now facing unplanned economic risks from the sudden taxes imposed by the US, which is also in breach of the conventions of the World Trade Organization according to critics.

President Trump is now reversing free trade and a global rules based order.

He is moving towards an anti-globalization utopia asked for by many in Sri Lanka and elsewhere who oppose consumer sovereignty and propose a domestic production economy and self-sufficiency by pushing up prices.

Trump is facing push back from some businesses who are now integrated to the world with at least one former ally threatening to take away his razor thin majority in the Senate in particular and make him a lame duck President.

Sri Lanka controls trade and denies economic freedom to the people in part to ‘save foreign exchange’ because macro-economists have rejected classical economics and print money to cut rates.

After cutting rates – usually with printed money – or re-financing private or government credit, various restrictions are placed on imports by the central bank or exchange controls are tightened.  (Colombo/July18/2025)