Sri Lanka’s 2028 debt repayments not cause for alarm: Economist

Colombo, Aug. 20 (Daily Mirror) - Sri Lanka is capable of meeting its debt repayment obligations from 2028 onwards despite the challenges ahead, provided the Government continues with economic reforms and takes measures to strengthen foreign exchange reserves, Professor J. G. Sri Ranjith of the University of Peradeniya said.

His comments came in response to a recent warning by former President Ranil Wickremesinghe that Sri Lanka could face another severe economic challenge from the end of 2028 unless it builds its foreign exchange reserves to around US$15 billion.

Speaking to Daily Mirror, Professor Ranjith acknowledged that Sri Lanka would face increased debt repayment obligations from 2028 under the agreements reached with the International Monetary Fund (IMF). However, he said the current economic trajectory was relatively positive and the situation was not necessarily as gloomy as suggested.

“By 2028, Sri Lanka will have to repay loans according to the agreements with the IMF. However, despite natural disasters and international issues such as wars, the economy is moving on a relatively smooth and slightly upward trend,” he said.

He noted that Sri Lanka had so far been meeting the quantitative criteria under the IMF programme and that recent IMF reviews had indicated that the country was maintaining the required momentum.

“Most of the indicators are showing that we are doing reasonably well. There are upward movements in terms of the primary balance, while the Government is also moving towards reducing the budget deficit,” Professor Ranjith noted.

Nevertheless, he stressed that debt repayments remained a major challenge and that Sri Lanka needed to focus on increasing foreign exchange earnings and reserves.

Furthermore, he said developing infrastructure would be important to attract foreign investors, while the private sector should be encouraged to expand exports and strengthen business activity.

Professor Ranjith also said the Government should ensure that costs, particularly fuel and electricity prices, were aligned with market conditions as part of broader economic reforms.

Huge challenge before SL to avoid another economic crisis: Ranil

No threat of another bankruptcy, Deputy Minister responds to Ranil