Sri Lanka’s UNP invites four SJB heavyweights to return to president’s party

ECONOMYNEXT — With just months to go to Sri Lanka’s presidential polls, President Ranil Wickremesinghe’s United National Party (UNP) has extended an open invitation to four prominent members of the main opposition Samagi Jana Balawegaya (SJB) to join the UNP.

UNP General Secretary Palitha Range Bandara invited SJB MPs Thalatha Athukorale, Kabeer Hashim, Harsha de Silva, and Eran Wickramaratne to join the UNP, the latter three of whom make up the SJB’s economic council.

Bandara claimed the SJB, which broke off from the UNP in the run-up to the 2020 parliamentary elections, is now controlled by a faction of the ruling Sri Lanka Podujana Peramuna (SLPP). He implied that the SJB leader Sajith Premadasa has been ignoring the four MPs the UNP is now trying to woo to its side.

“Today this party has gone completely to the hands of a faction of the SLPP,” he said. Does Sajith Premadasa pay any heed to Thalatha, Harsha, Eran or Kabir? Why stay where you’re not wanted?”

“I ask you to join in good faith in this new year,” said Bandara, at a press conference held three days after the traditional Sinhala Tamil New Year.

“Join hands with President Wickremesinghe and strengthen the country that’s now being developed,” he said.

The former MP added that the wise course of action for SJB members is to return to the familiar fold of the UNP and continue their work.

Responding to these comments, SJB MP Chandima Weerakkody insisted that no one is going anywhere.

“Everyone is going to join with the SJB. If there’s a parliamentary election, there will be an SJB government, if a presidential election, Sajith Premadasa will be president.

“No matter who might be seen going here or there, that is the final result,” he said.

Weerakkody contested the last parliamentary polls on the SLPP ticket, but joined the SJB recently.

“They said 25, 30 or 40 would come. Then that they would come to the meeting in Kuliyapitiya. Nobody went. They won’t come,” he said. (Colombo/Apr17/2024)