“Enchanted Wonders” Christmas Tree Lighting

One Galle Face, the premier retail destination in Sri Lanka, officially unveiled Colombo’s most iconic Christmas experience with its annual Tree Lighting Ceremony held recently. This year, the mall celebrates the season under the enchanting theme “Enchanted Wonders,” creating a magical and visually captivating festive atmosphere for all visitors. The centrepiece of the celebration is Sri Lanka’s tallest indoor Christmas tree, standing at an impressive 76 feet, marking a standout moment in the country’s holiday calendar.

The ceremony transformed the mall into a festive setting filled with striking illumination, seasonal artistry, and immersive installations. The official lighting moment set the tone for the holiday season at One Galle Face, inviting families, shoppers, and visitors to experience a new era of experiential retail throughout the month. Guests can look forward to a line-up of interactive activities, family-friendly engagements, seasonal showcases, and exclusive festive privileges curated for One Galle Face Rewards Members.

The One Galle Face festive celebrations are powered by Sampath Bank as its Strategic Partner and YES FM as the Official Radio Partner. The memorable evening brought together a distinguished community of influential partners, leaders, and creative professionals from various domains, including senior leadership of One Galle Face, Shangri-La Hotel management, heads of leading international and local brands, Sampath Bank management and employees, MBC Network leadership, representatives from One Galle Face Tower and The Residences at One Galle Face, as well as popular personalities and local celebrities.

One Galle Face General Manager Sachin Dhanawade commented, “We are excited to officially launch the One Galle Face Christmas holidays with the lighting of the Christmas tree. The ‘Enchanted Wonders’ setting is guaranteed to elevate the One Galle Face festive experience as it is a next-generation Christmas theme designed to immerse shoppers in a magical, future-forward holiday atmosphere. As the premier retail destination in the country, we are constantly striving to deliver a world-class experience in terms of service and hospitality, ensuring an unforgettable experience for every time they walk in through our doors.”

With over 350 world-class brands, One Galle Face has established itself as Sri Lanka’s premier retail destination, offering a dynamic mix of global fashion labels, fine dining experiences, and family entertainment. Over the past 12 months, the mall welcomed over 40 new brands, including Carnage, Under Armour, Taco Bell, Levi’s, The Body Shop and Birkenstock, further enhancing its diverse portfolio and delivering an even wider selection of the most loved brands to its customer base. With even more exciting new openings planned in the coming months, the mall continues to evolve as a one-stop hub for shopping, leisure, and lifestyle.

Beyond retail, One Galle Face offers a holistic lifestyle ecosystem featuring something for everyone. Beauty and health-conscious individuals can enjoy its world-class wellness portfolio spanning personal care, aesthetics, grooming, and fitness.

HUTCH joins nation’s rebuild effort with Rs.60 million contribution to ‘Rebuild Sri Lanka’ Fund

ADB President announces emergency grants for flood relief across Southeast Asia and Sri Lanka

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.