The Offices at Cinnamon Life commands highest rental rates in Colombo

The Offices at Cinnamon Life, developed by John Keells Properties, has set a new benchmark in Colombo’s commercial real-estate market, achieving the highest rental rates in the city. This milestone reflects the growing demand for premium, well- located office spaces within integrated developments that offer a seamless blend of business, lifestyle, and connectivity.

The office tower features large, efficient floor plates of 10,646 sq. ft., designed to meet the evolving needs of modern businesses. This is complemented by high-quality infrastructure, ample parking, advanced building management systems, and professional facilities management.

Commenting on the strong performance of the development, Inoke Perera, Sector Head, John Keells Properties and Executive Vice President, John Keells Group stated, “The Offices at Cinnamon Life represents a new era in how businesses operate and engage within the city. The strong rental rates achieved at USD 3 per sq. ft. per month + taxes

(approximately Rs. 950 per sq. ft. + taxes) reflect not just the quality of the office spaces, but the value of being part of a fully integrated development that brings together business, lifestyle, and global connectivity in one destination. We are seeing increasing interest from both local and international corporates who recognise the long-term advantages of this ecosystem.”

As Colombo continues to evolve into a regional business and lifestyle hub, developments such as City of Dreams Sri Lanka and Cinnamon Life are playing a pivotal role in redefining urban

commercial real estate. The strong rental performance of its office spaces reflects growing market confidence and a clear shift towards integrated, future-ready work environments that offer both convenience and prestige.

John Keells Properties is the real estate arm of John Keells Group, Sri Lanka’s largest listed conglomerate. With a proven track record of delivering iconic developments such as The Emperor and Monarch at Crescat City, On Three20, 7th Sense, TRI-ZEN, The Residences at Cinnamon Life, VIMAN Ja-Ela, and the latest development Vauxhall DSTRCT, the company continues to set new benchmarks in urban living and commercial real estate through innovation, quality, and trust.