Govt. refuses to back down on fingerprint system as postal strike continues

Cabinet Spokesman and Minister Dr. Nalinda Jayatissa says ready to meet with TUs only if they agree to Govt. decisions on implementation of fingerprint attendance system and changes to overtime pay

Asserts Govt. already addressed 17 of the 19 demands presented by postal unions

Warns trade unions who do not agree to fingerprint system can seek employment elsewhere

Cabinet Spokesman and Minister Dr. Nalinda Jayatissa yesterday said he is prepared to meet with postal trade unions only if they agree to Government decisions on the implementation of a fingerprint attendance system and changes to overtime pay.

Speaking at the post-Cabinet meeting media briefing, he stressed that even brief work stoppages result in financial losses for the Department of Posts, while prolonged strikes could strain the Treasury and jeopardise future salary and overtime payments.

“The Government has already addressed 17 of the 19 demands presented by postal unions. However, the demands regarding fingerprint recording and overtime allowances are unacceptable and will not be entertained,” he stressed, adding that the trade unions were not supportive to resolve the issue even at the initial discussions.

The Cabinet Spokesman also claimed that certain groups with political affiliations are objecting to fingerprint recording. “The Government has increased the basic salary and accordingly the overtime is being adjusted. Even amidst financial constraints the Treasury has agreed to disburse the overtime pay in phases. Against this backdrop, if the trade unions still deny to agree to the fingerprint attendance system, they can seek employment elsewhere,” Dr. Jayatissa warned, pointing out that the leave of all employees of the Department of Posts has been cancelled with effect from 17 August.

Postal workers launched an islandwide strike on Sunday, pressing for 19 demands, including changes to overtime allowances and the withdrawal of the biometric attendance system. The walkout has caused widespread disruptions to core postal services across the country.

Postmaster General Ruwan Sathkumara has also defended the fingerprint system, pointing to audit findings that revealed widespread claims of pay and overtime without attendance verification. He described the strike as unreasonable, noting that most of the unions’ concerns have already been resolved.