‘Sleeping Tigers’ and barking govt.

President Anura Kumara Dissanayake once spoke of a ‘shadow state’ run by powerful crime syndicates and vowed to dismantle it. The general consensus is that such an unseen, parallel power structure really exists and must be eliminated as a national priority. However, criminals are not alone in running ‘parallel governments’. Extremely powerful business cartels also challenge the writ of the state and exploit the public, with impunity.

Transport Minister Bimal Rathnayake has evinced a keen interest in bringing order out of chaos in the passenger transport sector. He deserves praise and public support for his efforts. He has taken upon himself the onerous task of safeguarding the interests of commuters and ensuring road safety. His attempts to bring the private industry to heel have run into stiff resistance, with the bus mudalalis issuing warnings and even threats.

Minister Rathnayake has warned that the tough measures under consideration to make roads safer include the cancellation of the route permits of the buses whose drivers and conductors are addicted to narcotics. Desperate situations are said to call for desperate measures. In 2021, the then State Minister of Transport Dilum Amunugama made a chilling revelation: about 80% of private bus drivers in Colombo and its suburbs were addicted to drugs. The situation must be more or less the same in other parts of the country as well. A survey conducted by the Lanka Private Bus Owners’ Association (LPBOA) has revealed that 45% of private bus drivers are addicted to narcotics. Their addiction to relatively new drugs such as ICE (crystal methamphetamine) is on the rise, according to the police, who disclosed in 2023 that out of 1,781 drivers subjected to drug tests in the Western Province about 100 had been found to be under the influence of dangerous drugs; most of them were ICE addicts. LPBOA President Gemunu Wijeratne himself has said that about 50% of bus workers are addicted to narcotics.

The severity of drug addiction among bus drivers and conductors may have compelled Minister Rathnayake to consider deterrent measures, such as the cancellation of route permits, as a way out. Private bus owners’ associations have condemned the proposed move and threatened to stage a countrywide strike.

Wijeratne did not mince his words when he tore into the government, at a media briefing, the other day. Insisting that bus owners must not be penalised for what their workers did, he said they had no way of finding out whether drivers and conductors were under the influence of drugs. “Would Minister Rathnayake resign if his driver was found to be using illicit drugs?” Wijeratne rhetorically asked, accusing the government of selectively implementing the law. He cited several instances where NPP politicians and their cronies had got away with serious transgressions.

Wijeratne’s arguments are not without merit. The legal process was blatantly subverted to let former Speaker Asoka Ranwala off the hook following a road accident he caused two months ago, as Wijeratne said. Ranwala was not made to undergo a blood-alcohol test for more than 12 hours, and the police audaciously claimed that they had run out of breathalyser test kits. No legal action has been taken against the questionable release of as many as 323 high-risk containers, without Customs inspection, from the Colombo Port. A mega coal scam has gone uninvestigated. When a cannabis plantation on a plot of land belonging to an NPP MP’s relative was raided, it was the police officers responsible for the raid who had to face disciplinary and legal action. The JVP supporters who parked buses on the Southern Expressway in violation of traffic laws last year have got off scot-free. So, Wijeratne may have struck a responsive chord with the public when he highlighted how the government itself was undermining the rule of law. However, the fact that the incumbent administration shields transgressors within its ranks is no reason why the private bus operators should be allowed to enjoy the freedom of the wild ass. Wijeratne seems to think two wrongs make a right.

The government should not make hasty decisions when handling sensitive issues. It ought to respect the fundamental legal maxim, audi alteram partem, and listen to what the bus operators have to say. However, the imperious private bus associations must not be allowed to intimidate a democratically elected government. Wijeratne has warned that the government’s efforts to cancel the route permits of buses driven by drug addicts will be its undoing, for the bus operators will launch a countrywide strike. He has asked the government not to rouse ‘sleeping tigers’. In saying so, he has made an unintentional allusion to the Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam militarily neutralised by a previous government. It remains to be seen whether the incumbent administration with a supermajority is equal to the task of taming the ‘sleeping tigers’, safeguarding the interests of the public and ensuring road safety while redressing the legitimate grievances of the bus operators.

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.