Climate change fuelling domestic violence against women in Sri Lanka - report

Sri Lanka, like many other island nations, continues to suffer from the devastation that is climate change. As extreme weather events become more frequent and intense, the nation’s farmers are struggling to cope with crop failures and lost income.

Unfortunately for the women in the country, this tragedy is increasingly turning them into the victims of domestic violence at the hands of their own frustrated families, a Reuters report reveals.

The feature elaborates on the miseries of female Sri Lankan farmers such as Renuka Karunarathna. Years of scant rainfall and extreme droughts have led to failed harvests, pushing her family into extreme poverty. Renuka’s husband, like many other partners discontented by their economic hardships, takes his anger out on his wife, often in the form of physical abuse.

Studies have pointed to a clear link between climate change and domestic violence. When basic needs like food and water become scarce, tensions within families rise. Men, often burdened by the traditional role of breadwinner, may resort to violence to express their frustrations. This is further exacerbated by social norms that normalise violence against women in some countries.

While detailed data on the direct link between climate change and domestic violence is scarce, Sri Lanka’s 2023 national policy on climate change paints a grim picture. The report reveals a 22-fold increase in climate-induced hazards compared to 1973-1983. Additionally, the nation’s 2019 Women’s Wellbeing Survey found that nearly 40% of Sri Lankan women have experienced physical, sexual, emotional or economic abuse from their partners, the report reads.

Considering a third of Sri Lankan farmers comprise women, there is some form of self-reliance among them. However, floods, droughts, deforestation and drying water sources have decimated traditional farming practices, inevitably leaving even these “self-sufficient” women more reliant on their husbands.

This reliance often leaves them more vulnerable to their husbands’ frustrations and violence. The report outlines that many women are often denied permission to visit their parents and siblings, and are beaten up if they forcefully try to leave. And as the independence of these women diminishes, so does their dignity and ability to leave such abusive situations. Further, social stigma prevents many such women from disclosing the violence at home, surveys found.

Combating climate change and its impact on women requires a multi-pronged approach. Addressing the root causes of violence, such as economic hardship and social norms, is crucial. Additionally, investing in climate-resilient agriculture and empowering women through income generation and education are vital steps towards a safer and more equitable future.