Walter Stace in British Ceylon, 1910-1932

Walter T. Stace was a British citizen born in 1886 and educated in private schools in Wales and Scotland before completing his undergraduate degree at Trinity College, Dublin. He was therefore of middle-upper class background. His philosophical leanings did not deter him from signing up for the Colonial Service. He was sent to Ceylon – reaching the island with his wife … and being posted to the town of Galle in 1910.

He wrote his autobiography at some point and the Sri Lankan chapters have been printed as a book entitled FOOTPRINTS ON WATER under the editorial direction of Bernd Pflug by the Sailfish firm in Colombo marketed by the Perera Hussein Publishing House in a 218-page booklet bearing the ISBN 978-624-5993-02=4

His autobiographical chapters have the following headings: Colombo and Galle; Galle; Chilaw; Gampola and Kandy; Governor Chalmers; Negombo; Land Settlement; Colombo Municipality and British Colonialism. His prose is simple and lucid, his perspective clinical and analytic. This renders his book into a must read — one further enhanced by Bernd Pflug’s review chapter at the end and his initial introduction.

As a pertinent aside, let me note that young Walter Stace arrived in Ceylon with his wife Adelaide. This lady was a widow who was18 years elder to Walter and the book begins with a refreshingly frank description of their courting relationship and the circumstances surrounding the union.

Around the year 1920, however, the two parted company when Adelaide remained in UK after their furlough and Stace returned to Ceylon to take up a new posting at Negombo. It was during his service at Negombo that he got to know Blanche Beven, the daughter of a prominent Burgher family in the locality. Blanche and Walter eventually married in 1926. Blanche was game enough to face the rigours of district circuits on Stace’s land settlement work where they encountered heat, flies, mosquitoes and what-have-you.

It so happens that I was born and bred within the Fort of Galle (1938-1950s) and that I am familiar with what was known as the New Oriental Hotel on Church Street where Stace and his wife resided [subsequently and recently renamed the “Amangalla”]. This hotel often housed Europeans who disembarked from ships and also served as an overnight resting place for British public servants on official business …. Leonard Woolf among them.

When my Dad who was the District Medical Officer of Matara General Hospital around 1946-48 came to Galle law courts located in the Galle Fort to provide specialist medical witness at court cases, some of us 10 siblings including me (around 10- years old at that time) visited the New Oriental Hotel (NOH) for lunch while enjoying a car trip to Galle and a day out in Galle – sometimes we even sat inside the court by my Dad during cases. For some cases we were requested to vacate the court as only adults could attend. Great to know the history of the NOH.

In a separate piece on the same subject, Michael Roberts also says:

Walter Terence STACE was a British man born in 1886 who entered the British colonial service after a university education and was assigned to Sri Lanka in 1910. He married a Burgher lady, MM Beven in 1928 – is second marriage this – and then resigned in 1932 and moved on to USA where he pursued a successful university teaching career in Philosophy. Following his retirement, he composed an autobiography in 1964 with the intriguing title FOOTPRINTS ON WATER.

This work has been edited by Bernd Pflug with an excellent and readable “Critique” at the end of the autobiography and presented in Sri Lanka in a slim volume of 218 pages by the Perera Hussein Publishing House.

Walter Stace’s reflections are presented in a lucid and clinical manner that should be a guideline for all authors. Indeed, it is remarkably clinical.

On reaching Ceylon in 1910, Stace and his wife were sent to Galle at the south-west corner of the island where there was a small port alongside its large and extensive Dutch-built “Fort of Galle”. His salary of Rs 300/ per month was such that the couple chose to reside at the principal hotel within the Fort: that is, to add my local knowledge, the “New Oriental Hotel” run by the (Burgher) Ephraums family.

Walter and his wife were not in agreement with the aloofness of British colonials in the race and class-conscious colonial society of the time. He notes in critical voice: “The British, being the ruling class, behaved as superior beings and kept themselves aloof from the indigenous communities” (p. 47).

His account of the peculiarities that arose in Galle in the early 1910s is as hilarious as politically meaningful. There were two British clubs in Galle. Both were racially exclusive — with only one Burgher gentleman attached to these superior enclaves. Stace was also made aware of the differentiation between (‘superior’) Dutch Burghers and ‘inferior’ Portuguese Burghers.

Galle in his time in 1910-and-therabouts was also unusual in having a British “police constable” from London posted to its echelons there – as a “sergeant”. Sergeant maybe; but not socially high enough to secure membership in the two clubs. In defiance of convention Stace made it a point to go for walks with this gentleman in the evening (page 50). These walks, I add, would have been around the perimeter of the fort –the “ramparts” as they are called and marked.

Among the residents at the NOH was the “Provincial Surgeon” – who happened to be a Burgher educated in England and married to an English wife. In step with the rigid socio-political ‘rules’ of imperial British society this ‘mixed’ family “outcasts from the British community” (Stace’s phrase: p. 52). Thus, the “Provincial Surgeon and his wife became our best friends in Galle” (p. 52). This little circle was then augmented by a new arrival – a British cadet who happened to be a bachelor and one who resided in the NOH. “Often in the evenings Adelaide and I and the new cadet would foregather in the quarters of the Provincial Surgeon, largely because he had a piano there and his daughter played on it. Sometimes we all sang popular songs because his daughter played on it.”

Ahh! Thereupon the British cadet was quickly posted to another town in the island. It seems that – in Stace’s accounting – the race conscious British authorities feared contamination of their superior ‘alignments’ from the potential outcome of ‘crossbreeding’ my words in this instance).

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.