HNB Life extends wings into digital future with new mobile app

HNB Life celebrating 25 years of protecting lives and being there for Sri Lankans through every stage of life, launched the HNB Life Mobile App recently.

Built around the Company’s new brand philosophy, “Wings for Life,” the mobile app reflects HNB Life’s purpose of empowering customers with protection and the freedom to thrive, no matter where life takes them. The app is designed to make life easier for customers by giving them quick and convenient access to their policy information anytime, anywhere, right at their fingertips.

Through the app, customers can easily access policy details, stay updated on their information, make requests, and connect with HNB Life in a much more seamless and convenient way.

Speaking about the launch of the app, Lasitha Wimalaratne, Executive Director / Chief Executive Officer of HNB Life PLC stated, “At HNB Life, everything we do is centered around making life easier and better for our customers. As we celebrate our 25th year, the launch of the HNB Life Mobile App is another important step forward in delivering on our purpose of empowering lives with protection and the freedom to thrive. We want our customers to have their policy information available at their fingertips, whenever they need it.”

Over the past few years, HNB Life has continued to make significant investments in technology and digital transformation to enhance the customer journey. This includes upgrading and modernizing its core systems, integrating AI-powered capabilities, and launching HANA, the Company’s chatbot designed to offer customers faster and more convenient support.

Speaking further, Suneth Jayamanne, Executive Vice President / Chief Information Officer of HNB Life PLC said, “Our focus has always been on using technology in a way that genuinely improves the customer experience. Over the years, we have invested heavily in strengthening our digital capabilities, from introducing AI integrations to launching HANA and modernizing our core systems. The HNB Life Mobile App is another key milestone in that journey. It gives customers a simple, secure, and convenient way to manage their policies and stay connected with us wherever

The HNB Life mobile app can be downloaded via the Google Play Store and Apple App Store.