Trace all missing firearms

The CID arrested EPDP leader and former minister Douglas Devananda last Thursday in connection with an ongoing investigation into a pistol issued to him by the Army way back in 2001 allegedly ending up in the underworld. It has claimed that information elicited from Makandure Madush, a notorious criminal, led the police to the weapon hidden in a shrub in Weliweriya.

Devananda is one of the battle-scarred ex-Tiger combatants who courageously stood up to the LTTE and helped defeat it. He survived several assassination attempts, including one inside the Kalutara Prison. Devananda’s predicament has gladdened the hearts of pro-LTTE groups beyond measure, as evident from their social media posts.

The pistol in question was reportedly issued to Devananda at the height of LTTE terror; Madush was arrested in 2019 and killed in October 2020, while in police custody. Curiously, the serial number of the weapon remained intact while it was in the underworld.

Madush is long dead, and there is no way the CID’s claims about the firearm at issue can be checked. The CID, which is under two members of the Retired Police Collective of the JVP/NPP, has become the JVP’s rottweiler. The police are all out to protect the interests of the JVP/NPP government; they suddenly ran out of breathalysers when a government MP caused a road accident the other day. A policeman, assaulted by a government MP and his backers recently for conducting a raid on a cannabis plantation, was arrested and interdicted! The police have not arrested a deputy minister and an NPP mayor, charged with fraud.

Now that the CID is busy probing Devananda’s pistol, let it be urged to launch an investigation into thousands of weapons issued by the Defence Ministry to politicians in the second JPV uprising in the late 1980s, and the arms seized by the JVP during that period.

In January 2019, the then Defence Secretary Hemasiri Fernando disclosed that about 4,700 9mm pistols and revolvers had been licensed, but there was no information about those who had obtained them and, worse, some individuals possessed as many as 15 small firearms each! In 2023, the then State Minister of Defence Premitha Bandara Tennakoon revealed in Parliament that the defence authorities had issued about 700 firearms to 154 politicians in the late 1980s, when the JVP went on a killing spree, but none of them had been returned. This figure, we believe, is a gross underestimate.

The National Commission against the Proliferation of Illicit Small Arms, appointed by President Chandrika Bandaranaike Kumaratunga in 2004, dealt extensively with the issue of illegal weapons in circulation in Sri Lanka, as we pointed out in a previous editorial comment. Its survey report contains valuable information, which, however, needs to be updated. Defence authorities should study this document thoroughly and commission a fresh survey on illicit firearms.

The police must go all out to find the illegal firearms used by the JVP during its second uprising. Most of the JVP’s arms caches have not been traced. SJB MP Dayasiri Jayasekara told Parliament on 27 February 2025 that more than 2,000 firearms seized by the JVP between 1987 and 1989 had not been recovered. One may recall that the JVP attacked several police stations and military camps and grabbed many weapons. In April 1987, it seized the arsenal of the Pallekele army camp. Now that the JVP-led NPP has formed a government and launched a campaign to eliminate gun violence, the Defence Ministry and the CID may be able to ascertain information about the firearms used by the JVP in the late 1980s.

Hardly a day passes without incidents of gun violence. Two shooting incidents were reported from the Western Province yesterday. The proliferation of illicit firearms in Sri Lanka can be attributed to several key factors, according to researchers; they include gunrunning, illegal operations carried out by rogue elements in the police and the armed forces, local arms manufacturing, and criminals gaining access to arms caches of the LTTE and the weapons that went missing in the late 1980s.

The police produced 12 suspects before the Colombo Chief Magistrate on March 22, 2019, for having supplied weapons retrieved from some buried LTTE arms caches in Kilinochchi to criminal gangs elsewhere. The LTTE seized firearms from the police, the armed forces and the rival militant groups like the EPDP. It is incumbent upon the police to make a serious effort to trace all illegal firearms. Let that be their New Year resolution.

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.