SEC approves Accredited Scholars for Islamic capital market product certification

The Securities and Exchange Commission of Sri Lanka (SEC) yesterday announced the approval of a list of Accredited Shariah Scholars as “Supplementary Service Providers”.

The six scholars are authorised to certify the Shariah compliance of Islamic Capital Market Products intended for listing on the Colombo Stock Exchange (CSE) in accordance with the Listing Rules.

The SEC said it considers this as an essential step in view of products that require Shariah compatibility and to satisfy the needs of Islamic investors.

“Recognising the growing demand for Shariah Compliant Debt Securities such as Sukuk, both domestically and internationally, the SEC took a proactive step by approving an enabling regulatory framework to introduce such products on the Colombo Stock Exchange,” the capital market regulator said in a statement.

The accredited Shariah Scholars and compliance certification process approved by the SEC will provide credibility to the products listed on the Exchange, it added.

The SEC published an advertisement calling for applications from Shariah scholars with the requisite academic / professional qualifications, work experience and other eligibility criteria and through a rigorous selection process.

As outlined in the published Guidelines and SEC’s directive to the CSE, issuers of Islamic capital market products seeking a listing on the CSE are required to obtain a Shariah compliance certification from any of the three Accredited Shariah Scholars. The Guidelines define the duties of a Shariah Scholar, qualifications and experience required, submission of reports and record maintenance, governance standards, conflict of interest management, and fit & proper criteria.

The SEC believes that selecting Shariah Scholars based on a set of clearly defined eligibility criteria and setting minimum standards will help establish a better Shariah compliance governance process and build market credibility for both local and international investors.

The SEC will review and update the list of Accredited Shariah Scholars periodically.

The following Accredited Shariah Scholars to serve as Supplementary Service Providers under the provisions of the SEC Act:

Ibrahim Saad Yousif Abd Elaziz (based in United Arab Emirates)