Australia-Sri Lanka relationship  continues to soar

Australia and Sri Lanka’s commitment to countering maritime security threats reaches new heights with the gifting of a former Royal Australian Air Force Beechcraft King Air 350 to the Sri Lanka Air Force at a special ceremony in Colombo.

Legally handed over to the Sri Lanka Air Force in late October, the modern twin-engine turboprop aircraft will substantially enhance Sri Lanka’s aerial maritime surveillance capability to combat transnational crime, including people smuggling.

Sri Lanka Air Force Commander Air Marshal Udeni Rajapaksa said the gift from Australia demonstrates the mutual efforts of both countries to maintaining the security of the Indian Ocean region.

“I am sincerely grateful for the King Air 350 aircraft – a gift that not only bolsters our ability to combat threats to our maritime security, but importantly underscores the bond that exists between our nations. We are proud to continue supporting regional security efforts with our long-standing partner, Australia,” Air Marshal Rajapaksa said.

Speaking on the side lines of the ceremonial gifting at the Ratmalana Air Force Base, Commander Joint Agency Task Force Operation Sovereign Borders, Rear Admiral Brett Sonter, RAN said the event is yet another display of the gold standard that defines the Australia-Sri Lanka relationship. “While today’s ceremonial gifting is a wonderful opportunity to reflect on our enduring partnership, it is equally important to note that by working together to face shared challenges, we can overcome many obstacles. Australia and Sri Lanka remain resolute in stopping anyone involved in illegal maritime activities,” Rear Admiral Sonter said.

In addition to supporting maritime security efforts, the Beechcraft King Air 350 aircraft will also provide valuable training opportunities for Sri Lanka Air Force personnel.

“A capability uplift such as this isn’t just limited to hardware, there is a significant human element too. Whilst we are proud to gift the aircraft to the Sri Lanka Air Force, it is equally fulfilling to be able to contribute to the training and development of its next generation of personnel, as they acquire new skills via this significant new asset,” Rear Admiral Sonter added.

The Beechcraft King Air 350 aircraft was welcomed with a water cannon salute

Sri Lanka Air Force Commander Air Marshal Udeni Rajapaksa, Commander of the Joint Agency Task Force-Operation Sovereign Borders Rear Admiral Brett Sonter sign the agreement witnessed by Australian High Commissioner to Sri Lanka Paul Stephens and Defence Secretary Air Vice Marshal (Rtd) Sampath Thuyacontha look on – Pix by Upul Abayasekara