Soaring mercury and need for caution

A major El Niño event is developing rapidly, and it is expected to intensify in the coming weeks. Some climatologists are of the view that the unfolding El Niño may not impact Sri Lanka to the extent of triggering a nationwide catastrophe. This is certainly good news, but the possibility of El Niño causing drought, reduced monsoon rainfall and agricultural losses in this country cannot be ruled out.

Meanwhile, France is reeling from a record-breaking European heatwave, which has claimed more than 2,000 lives and left people scrambling for cooling devices in shops. It has been placed under a red heat alert. This situation cannot be directly attributed to the current El Niño, which has only aggravated it. The current heatwave is mainly due to climate change, which has caused hot air to be trapped over Europe, according to experts.

There are media reports of global temperatures rising across all regions, but at different rates of warming. All major land areas across the globe are getting warmer, the worst affected being the Arctic region (covering parts of northern Canada, Greenland, Russia, Alaska, and northern Europe), with faster increases reported from Europe and Asia. There is no need for panic, but prudence demands the formulation of strategies urgently to meet possible outcomes.

El Niño is unpredictable, and anything is possible, the worst-case scenario being prolonged drought and the resultant drop in agricultural production. In Sri Lanka, reservoirs run dry even during short dry spells, causing severe water stress.

Sri Lanka is no stranger to heatwaves, albeit not of the same severity as the ones in Europe at present. However, recent studies indicate increasing frequency and intensity of heatwaves. There have been several such events during the past seven years or so in this country, with the Department of Meteorology and the government issuing warnings of increased risks of heat stroke, heat exhaustion, and dehydration, especially among outdoor workers, children and elders. It may be recalled that according to media reports based on research findings, between 2001 and 2013, about 23% of Sri Lankans were exposed to dangerous heatwave conditions.

Besides, urban centres, such as Colombo, are experiencing the so-called urban heat island effect due to buildings, pavements, etc., retaining heat. Sri Lanka should seriously consider adopting the Miyawaki method, a Japanese technique of creating dense micro-forests or ‘pocket forests’ in small urban spaces to improve biodiversity, capture carbon, reduce urban heat and improve air quality. London has reportedly adopted this method successfully. The question is why the city of Colombo, accredited as an international Wetland City by the Ramsar Convention of Wetlands, and its suburbs have not adopted the Miyawaki method.

As for Sri Lanka, two main El Niño and climate change mitigating factors are said to be its geographical location and its central mountain range, which helps maintain atmospheric moisture, reducing the likelihood of severe droughts experienced in some other countries affected by El Niño. Hence, the need to conserve the country’s forest cover, which is unfortunately shrinking.

For Sri Lanka as well as other countries, deforestation is no longer an environmental issue; it is a serious existential problem as well. Sri Lanka’s forest cover is believed to be about 29-30% of the total land area. The government has set an ambitious target of increasing it up to 32% of the land area. The ongoing reforestation initiatives deserve fullest public cooperation.

Nothing is said to be so certain as the unexpected in climatic events; forecasts about them could go wrong. Therefore, the need for Sri Lanka to remain alert and have contingency plans to mitigate their impact cannot be overstated.

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.