Negombo Magistrate discharges Jiffry Mohamed in drugs case

Negombo Magistrate Shilanee Perera made order discharging the fourth suspect, Jiffry Mohamed, from further proceedings in the alleged drug case, stating that no offence under section 54 (a) of the Poisons, Opium and Dangerous Drugs Act had been disclosed in the reports before Court. The Magistrate further held that no other criminal offence had been alleged against the suspect in the proceedings before Court.

Jiffry Mohamed, a Director of A Y Investments Impex Ltd., of ‘Supernova Complex’, Bankshall Street, Colombo, was produced in the Negombo Magistrate’s Court on allegations of receiving deposits of money from the bank account of the 1st suspect, one Fernando. The 1st suspect had previously been arrested for alleged possession of heroin. The 1st suspect, Fernando, was enlarged on bail by the Negombo High Court.

President’s Counsel M. M. Zuhair, appearing with Sanjay Perera, M. D. C. Jayamini and Mayurika de Silva for Jiffry Mohamed, filed written submissions stating that Jiffry Mohamed is a businessman of repute with no previous convictions or involvement with the police or courts. His business accounts are open for deposits, into which he regularly receives advance payments from multiple importers for the import of goods. He is a service provider and deposits the payments received in banks. Thereafter, it is the bank which converts the rupees into foreign currencies and transfers the money to the foreign exporters of goods to Sri Lanka. This is a lawful process under the Import and Export Control Act Regulation No 1 of 2011.

Counsel submitted that, according to the police, Jiffry Mohamed had received over Rs. 74 billion into his rupee accounts during the years 2024 and 2025. He is not aware of Fernando and has no knowledge of any deposits by the 1st suspect or the history of any such deposits. Jiffry Mohamed has no knowledge of, or any records relating to, drugs. In this case, there is no allegation or evidence that the suspect had trafficked or possessed any quantity of any drugs at any time.

Quoting Sriyalatha Saraswathie vs. Attorney General, Counsel Zuhair submitted that “the criminal liability attaches only to possession which is to be proved to be ‘actual’, ‘exclusive’ and ‘conscious possession’ on the part of a person. The facts of this case clearly show that there is no offence committed by Jiffry Mohamed under the dangerous drugs act.”

The Negombo Magistrate, following the written submissions filed on behalf of the 4th suspect, directed the Negombo Headquarters Police to file a detailed report on the evidence relating to the allegations. The Negombo Headquarters Police filed a report stating that there is no material to proceed further under the Drugs Act. The Magistrate thereupon discharged the suspect, Jiffry Mohamed.