Explainer: Sri Lanka’s key political risks after parliamentary elections

ECONOMYNEXT – Sri Lanka’s President Anura Dissanayake faces a range of key political risks and challenges, particularly given his position as the leader of the Marxist Janatha Vimukthi Peramuna (JVP)-led National People’s Power (NPP), a historically leftist alliance.

The NPP is tipped to win the November 14 parliamentary polls, but it is uncertain what number of seats it will gain in the 225-member legislature.

Dissanayake’s JVP has been involved in two insurrections in the past, while his broader NPP coalition is accused by rivals of having no experience in handling critical issues as a ruling party in the government.

Here is a detailed overview of the major political risks and policy dilemmas for Dissanayake’s government after forming an extended NPP government beyond the current three-member cabinet:

Sri Lanka’s economy remains fragile, and Dissanayake’s administration has to continue managing the terms of the International Monetary Fund bailout package initiated by the previous center-right government. While the NPP pledged to renegotiate certain terms, balancing economic reforms with domestic economic protectionism and socialist policies may prove contentious​. So far, Dissanayake’s 50-day “transition” government has maintained the status quo on the IMF deal, contrary to NPP’s hard stance to renegotiate and change the debt sustainability analysis (DSA). The DSA is a strategy Sri Lanka agreed with the global lender to achieve sustainable debt repayment and come out of its 2022 sovereign debt default.

Delay in receiving some World Bank, ADB funds due to delay in IMF deal

The country’s external debt restructuring is ongoing, with a precarious fiscal position requiring careful navigation. The NPP is compelled to maintain creditor confidence while addressing domestic demands for economic justice, including attempts to recover assets from foreign countries linked to corruption, which is likely to take years contrary to people’s expectations.

Court ruling on a case filed by Hamilton Reserve Bank against default

Impact in debt restructuring due to delay in IMF disbursements

Dissanayake campaigned on anti-corruption and systemic change, reflecting dissatisfaction with political elites. Delivering on these promises, especially in the context of past protests by his party-linked trade unions and public expectations, will be challenging without jeopardizing the country’s fragile economic stability. ​Most voters elected Dissanayake for his promise to address corruption. Analysts, however, say that change needs a holistic approach and not just arresting and punishing political leaders who are accused of corruption and impunity.

Ensuring justice in some key past court cases dragged for years, including Easter Sunday attack, Central Bank bond scam, and misuse of public funds

Impacts on new government’s popularity due to possible delays in some court cases

Protests by rival parties as NPP did when it was in the opposition

The NPP’s ideological roots include a traditionally adversarial stance toward India and an inclination toward China and Russia. Dissanayake has sought to moderate these positions for pragmatic diplomacy, but skepticism remains around potential reversals on sensitive projects, such as those involving Indian and Chinese investments​. Before his election, his party promised to abolish a key Indian renewable power project in Northern Sri Lanka. However, Dissanayake’s party has backpaddled and said it will review India’s Adani project and renegotiate in January. So far Dissanayake has not strongly antagonized the New Delhi government. However, most party cadres of JVP led by Dissanayake have strong anti-India sentiments. They have been critical against Indian projects including Trincomalee Oil Tank farm project in the past. In addition to India and China, Dissanayake also has to manage better relations with the US, Russia, Japan, and EU nations. These relationships are crucial for Sri Lanka to come out of the current economic crisis and sovereign debt default.

Dealing with the West including the US for investments, grants

Neutralizing some deals with foreign nations that are adverse to Sri Lanka

As the NPP has not previously governed, the lack of administrative experience poses a challenge. Furthermore, Dissanayake’s ability to enact reforms will be complicated if he fails to secure a stable parliamentary majority in the November 14 polls. Some of his appointments have already angered bureaucrats who say the new government has gone against the NPP’s promise of appointment based on meritocracy. It also does not have enough clean and corruption-free experts to negotiate international deals like IMF loan, debt restructuring, and energy deals. Such lack of expertise could make Dissanayake’s future government vulnerable to agree on less than what Sri Lanka should get in key international deals, analysts say.

Dissanayake’s campaign included efforts to engage both grassroots and business interests, including support for domestic industry. However, maintaining this balancing act while satisfying private-sector concerns about market interventions will be demanding.

7. Political Reforms and Governance Structures: Dissanayake aims to abolish Sri Lanka’s controversial executive presidency, but constitutional amendments require broad support. Achieving consensus across a diverse and divided political landscape could be difficult​.