Standard Chartered appoints Rukshila Seneviratne as new Head of Human Resources in Sri Lanka

Standard Chartered has announced the appointment of Rukshila Seneviratne as the new Head of Human Resources for Sri Lanka, effective 12th January 2024. In her new role, Rukshila will lead the country’s people strategy and will join the Bank’s Country Management Team. As part of her appointment, she will also assume duties as the Co-Chair of the Bank’s internal Diversity & Inclusion (D&I) Council.

Commenting on the new appointment, Standard Chartered Sri Lanka’s Chief Executive Officer, Bingumal Thewarathanthri, said: “We are pleased to announce the appointment of Rukshila Seneviratne as our new Head of Human Resources. While she has been an important part of our HR team for over a decade, her promotion reflects our culture of recognising internal talent and expertise and providing the opportunities to take on leadership roles. Rukshila’s elevation is also an example of our commitment to prioritise succession planning, ensuring leadership continuity. We trust she will continue to enhance our employee value proposition with the evolving needs of a thriving workplace.”

Rukshila’s journey with Standard Chartered began in Dubai as an Officer in Consumer Banking Mortgage Operations in May 2008. She later transitioned to Sri Lanka as Manager, Secured Lending and Credit Initiation in March 2010. In June 2013, she assumed a crucial role in the HR team, leading HR Service Delivery. Throughout the past decade, Rukshila has held several senior positions within HR, comprising HR Service Delivery, Performance Rewards and Benefits Delivery, Talent Acquisition, and HR Business Partner for Retail Banking, Risk and Support functions.

Related Topics:Head of Human Resources for Sri LankaRukshila SeneviratneStandard Chartered

SLT Digital Services launches innovative School Attendance Notification System as part of ESG initiative

Teejay Lanka & Hemas collaborate to promote menstrual hygiene in rural schools

Standard Chartered Priority to partner Soul Sounds to ring in season

Standard Chartered provides insights on global and Sri Lankan economic outlook at annual Research Briefing

Standard Chartered CEO appointed Chairperson of Sri Lanka Banks’ Association

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.