Sinopec opens first renovated filling station with new image, facilities

Plans to renovate remaining 149 filling stations over the next three years and explore opportunities for 50 brand new stations

Sinopec Lanka Energy Ltd., yesterday inaugurated its first renovated filling station at a grand re-opening ceremony in Trans Lanka Filling Station, Nawagamuwa, witnessing a major milestone on the company’s first anniversary since entering into Sri Lanka.

After seven months of smooth operation of all 150 stations, this new completion highlights Sinopec’s long-term commitment in revitalising the country’s energy sector. With continuous investments in renovation projects, facilities upgrading, and health, safety and environmental improvements, Sinopec empowers the sustained growth of dealers and partners.

Sinopec’s renovation principles encompass the exterior image and facilities upgrade, the unseen safety measurements that significantly improve safety and environmental protection standards and the training and development of the human resources.

Looking ahead, Sinopec plans to renovate the remaining 149 filling stations over the next three years and explore opportunities for 50 brand new stations. A vocational training and qualification grade system to fuel station staff will be built to help develop a more skilled workforce for the energy sector. A comprehensive customer service centre, which will be equipped with support in multiple languages is also to be introduced to effectively address inquiries from customers and dealers alike.

Sinopec Energy Lanka General Manager Wang Haini said: “Sinopec’s efforts in Sri Lanka are part of its broader commitment to enhancing the energy landscape through strategic investments in infrastructure and human capital development. Sinopec will be devoted to shaping high standards in Sri Lanka’s Petroleum Industry under the guidance of Ministry of Power and Energy and empowering Sri Lanka.”

She reaffirmed Sinopec’s dedication to a sustainable and prosperous future for Sri Lanka. Following the event, Sinopec extended its support to the local community by providing drinking water and food rations to those affected by the recent floods.

The celebration was graced by the State Minister D. V. Chanaka, Chinese Embassy Counsellor in charge of Economic Affairs Tang Yan Di and other distinguished guests.