A suspicious death, many questions

The tragic death of Assistant Director of the External Resources Department of the Ministry of Finance, Ranga Rajapaksha, 50, has given rise to doubts, suspicions and various conspiracy theories. It has become an issue reminiscent of the complex plot twists and tropes found in classic whodunits such as Agatha Christie’s Murder on the Orient Express and modern murder mysteries like Knives Out. Not even a postmortem examination has helped put the matter to rest. Two schools of thought have emerged about Rajapaksha’s death. One asserts that he committed suicide after being suspended over the diversion of USD 2.5 million from the Treasury to a rogue account, and the other insists that foul play cannot be ruled out.

No sooner had Rajapaksha been found dead, on 30 April, than a four-member panel of forensic experts was appointed to conduct a postmortem examination, and its report was submitted fast. The experts reportedly concluded that the victim had committed suicide. But their conclusion has been challenged in some quarters.

Prominent Opposition politicians and legal experts are among those who argue that Rajapaksha’s death was not properly probed, and the postmortem report is therefore not acceptable. They have gone to the extent of alleging that Rajapaksha’s death was part of a grand cover-up, the implication being that they suspect murder. Some of them have claimed that Rajapaksha, who was reportedly the first to complain of the fund diversion at issue, faced the same fate as Dan Priyasad, who made a formal complaint of the questionable release of red-flagged freight containers without mandatory Customs inspection from the Colombo Port. Priyasad was shot dead in 2025.

As for Rajapaksha’s death, there is no evidence to prove the allegation of foul play, but doubts and suspicions being expressed about it could have a corrosive effect on the integrity of the legal and judicial processes, and should therefore be cleared forthwith. After all, anything is possible in this country, where governments have earned notoriety for subverting the legal and judicial processes to protect their political interests.

There have been allegations that narcotics samples sent to the Government Analyst’s Department for testing were replaced with kurakkan flour. The JVP/NPP politicians are among those who have questioned the validity of a DNA test that revealed that Sarah Jasmine, the widow of Muhammadu Hastun, who carried out the Katuwapitiya Church massacre, in 2019, had been among the National Thowheed Jamaath members killed in a suicide bomb blast in Sainthamarathu a few days after the Easter Sunday terror attacks. So, the government cannot fault those who have refused to accept the official version of Rajapaksha’s death.

In an article published on the opposite page today, Prof. Susirith Mendis has mentioned several instances where JMO reports were found to have been erroneous or even falsified. Arguing that postmortem examinations are prone to error, negligence and falsification, Prof. Mendis mentions a fourth possibility, a legitimate academically defensible difference of opinion and points out that neither medicine nor forensics is an exact science. He says that whether the four-member expert panel looked into all aspects of the death of Rajapaksha is a moot point.

Some legal experts have called for a psychological autopsy to find out Rajapaksha’s mental state at the time of his death. They are right in having asked for an investigation into the victim’s life, behaviour and mindset in the period leading up to his death, as it is alleged that he may have been driven to suicide. Psychological autopsies are common in other countries, where they are conducted by forensic experts, clinicians and legal authorities. They may not provide absolute proof but can help courts, investigators and victim families understand what may have happened.

Given the serious doubts and suspicions expressed by experts, politicians and others about Rajapaksha’s death, the need for a fresh postmortem examination cannot be overstated.

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.