A sensitive issue mismanaged

The Trincomalee temple issue has been grossly mismanaged. A tense situation arose when the Coast Conservation Department (CCD) objected to the construction of a building near Sri Sambuddha Jayanthi Bodhiraja Viharaya in Trincomalee on Sunday. A protest erupted when the police rushed in and forcibly took away a Buddha statue, which had been placed at the disputed site. Some protesters, including two Buddhist monks, were injured , according to media reports. The victims have complained of police assault.

Sri Lankan politicians seem to have a very low estimation of the intelligence of the public. Hence their numerous false claims and blatant lies for the consumption of the people, who vote for them. On listening to the government’s absurd claim that the police had removed the Buddha statue in Trincomalee and kept it at a police station overnight because they wanted to ensure its safety, we were reminded of ‘Matilda’, whose “dreadful lies made one gasp and stretch one’s eyes”. The statue had been returned to the temple the following morning, the government said. Going by the government’s reasoning, one wonders how the police would have ensured the safety of a statue carved from a rock face, in case of threats of vandalism. There was absolutely no need for the police to remove the Buddha statue. They obviously overstepped their limits only to be asked by the government to return the statue in view of protests by the Opposition and Buddhist monks. They would not have resorted to force and removed the Buddha statue without the blessings of the political authority, which got cold feet due to the political fallout from the incident.

Some Opposition politicians have quoted Chapter II of the Constitution, which grants Buddhism the foremost place, while guaranteeing the rights of all religions, to bolster their argument that no action should have been taken against the construction at Sri Sambuddha Jayanthi Bodhiraja Viharaya. This, in our book, is flawed reasoning aimed at political expediency. The constitutional guarantee in question does not mean that alleged transgressions committed by Buddhist temples should go uninvestigated. Similarly, the police and the government should tread cautiously when they handle sensitive religious issues instead of trying to bulldoze their way through.

The angry reaction of the Illankai Tamil Arasu Kadchi (ITAK) to what it calls the lenient manner in which the government handled the construction at Bodhiraja Viharaya, and its call for all Tamil NPP MPs to pull out of the government in protest show that there is more to the issue than the alleged transgression of the coastal conservation laws. The ITAK has accused the NPP government of having capitulated to ‘majoritarian forces’. The devotees of Bodhiraja Viharaya insist that the building at issue is being constructed where a Dhamma school stood before the 2004 tsunami. They say they have documentary proof to support their claim. The CCD is apparently convinced otherwise.

Going by the contentions of the CCD, the police, the government, the Opposition, the ITAK and Buddhist monks, the Trincomalee dispute is a legal issue with an ethno-religious dimension. The CCD may resort to legal action if it has evidence to back its claim that the aforesaid construction is unlawful, but the other aspect of the problem should be handled separately by the government with the participation of religious leaders. There have been disputes over the siting of some religious places across the country, and they have remained unresolved and manifest themselves from time to time. There should be a proper strategy to manage such situations, as the Opposition has pointed out. Religious and political leaders have a pivotal role to play in resolving sensitive religious issues that have the potential to get out of control.

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.