Renowned Indian economist questions why Sri Lanka’s early social gains haven’t fueled lasting growth

Celebrated Indian economist Dr. Arvind Subramanian urged Sri Lanka to look beyond its current economic stabilisation, warning that the nation’s early human capital gains have historically lagged to translate into long-term, resilient growth.

Delivering a thought-provoking lecture at the Central Bank of Sri Lanka last week, the former Chief Economic Advisor to the Government of India placed human capital at the centre of Sri Lanka’s economic performance and what he described as puzzles – for which he knew no answers.

While acknowledging talks of regained stability and a growth shift here in Sri Lanka, Dr. Subramanian cautioned strongly against complacency. “Do not take stability for granted,” he emphasised, noting that macroeconomic stability has been very elusive in Sri Lanka’s past and that the recent crisis severely eroded living standards for ordinary citizens.

Quoting Austrian economist Joseph Schumpeter, he remarked: “The spirit of the people, its cultural level, its social structure… everything is written in fiscal history.” A country’s tax and expenditure patterns, he stressed, reveal deep truths about its societal and economic priorities.

Drawing a sharp contrast with India, he observed that while Sri Lanka achieved impressive early advances in health and education through deliberate state policy, India’s human capital improvements came largely after economic growth.

“In India, significant improvements in human capital indicators came after and because of economic growth. It happened despite society and despite the state, largely due to economic growth. Then growth boosted state resources for education and prompted families to invest in education spurring the rise of private institutions,” he explained.

“In contrast, Sri Lanka’s human capital space was characterised by early state-led achievements in health and education, preceding significant economic growth – a path that has not yielded the expected growth dividend,” he pointed out.

His analysis showed that Sri Lanka had a pressing intellectual and policy challenge:

In essence, it asked, why has Sri Lanka’s historical investments in people not driven more robust and sustained economic progress? And what must change in the country’s fiscal and economic strategy to turn its human potential into a true engine of secure and shared prosperity?

The lecture served as both a warning against complacency and an invitation to re-examine the fragile links between fiscal policy, human capital, and long-term economic destiny. For a nation on a fragile path to recovery, what he meant was: “Lasting stability must be built on tangible gains from its people’s capabilities.”

Despite Sri Lanka’s justifiable pride in its skilled workforce and social achievements, Dr. Subramanian’s insights revealed a different reality – one that calls for reflection and renewed strategy from the country’s policymakers.

However, a notable gap in the analysis was the absence of a contrast regarding Sri Lanka’s social fabric. While Dr. Subramanian powerfully quoted Schumpeter – that a nation’s spirit and social structure are written in its fiscal history, – he did not apply this lens to compare the cultural values and social structures of Sri Lanka and India, factors that may be critical to understanding the very paradox he outlined.

Ambeon Essentials enters into share sale and purchase agreement with Harischandra Mills

Standard Chartered: Sri Lanka’s 2026 economy bolstered by political stability

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.