Onion tears

Onion farmers have been protesting vehemently, unable to sell their produce, during the past several days. Cultivators from President Anura Kumara Dissanayake’s native place, Thambuttegama, are also up in arms, castigating the government for ignoring their appeals for help. Farmers’ associations say they are in this predicament due to onion imports, and the government has taken the farming community for a ride.

The incumbent government is not alone in having ignored farmer’s pleas for help and done precious little to prevent colossal amounts of agricultural produce from going to waste. Successive governments have failed to solve problems the agricultural sector is beset with. Onion farmers, other vegetable growers and paddy cultivators stage protest year in, year out. They voted for the JVP-led NPP overwhelmingly in the hope that it would address their grievances and grant relief. But the promised relief has turned out to be pie in the sky.

A chronic lack of storage facilities in vegetable growing areas and the absence of a proper distribution network have aggravated farmers’ problems. There has been no national strategy to help farmers dispose of their produce at fair prices and/or store them. The NPP pledged to solve farmers’ problems and modernise the agricultural sector as a national priority to develop the economy and ensure food security. Its manifesto, A Thriving Nation; A Beautiful Life, promises to establish storage and processing units for agricultural products (p. 63).

Sathosa has come forward to purchase big onions from local cultivators, but they have turned down its offer, insisting that the criteria it has stipulated are not fair. Protesters say Sathosa has said that onions should be uniform in size and quality; there should be about eight onions each per one kilogram; they must be fully mature and well-dried, and each of them should measure 35-60-mm in diameter. Farmers have said it is not possible to meet most of those criteria, which, they believe, have been introduced to facilitate onion imports. Sathosa has said it has to market quality products. But the question is why the government does not care to guarantee the quality of imported onions, which come in various sizes and are rarely uniform in quality. Some of them are even wet and rotten. One wonders whether most of them are fit for human consumption. The public has to buy them for want of a better alternative. This is something the Consumer Affairs Authority should look into.

Farmers are not without blame. They engage in unethical practices, such as concealing out-grade onions in the middle of sacks to evade visual inspection. Traders complain they suffer huge losses as a result. This may be one of the reasons why Sathosa has stipulated the aforesaid criteria for purchasing onions from local cultivators. But time was when the JVP ignored such deplorable practices and pressured previous governments to purchase their produce unconditionally.

One may recall that during the SLPP government, the then Minister of Trade Bandula Gunawardena had coconuts priced according to their sizes measured in inches. The JVP said Sri Lanka had switched to the metric system, and therefore measurements in inches had no legal validity. It ridiculed such criteria, describing them as absurd. Today, it is drawing flak for measuring onions!

Governments have a propensity for imports, which help the ruling party members line their pockets. While in the Opposition, the JVP would inveigh against the previous administrations and their leaders for importing staples shortly before the harvesting seasons began. The boot is now on the other foot.

Meanwhile, the current administration has evinced a keen interest in digitalisation and modernising agriculture. This, we believe, is the way forward. Technology can play a pivotal role in solving farmers’ problems through measures such as developing digital tools for forecasting and crop-planning, minimising post-harvest losses, integrating distribution systems, regulating demand and supply to reduce waste and preventing drastic price anomalies that affect both farmers and consumers adversely.

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.