PM Harini in UK says Commonwealth ‘really important forum’ in a tense world

Prime Minister Dr. Harini Amarasuriya (right) with Commonwealth Secretary-General Shirley Botchwey during their meeting in London

Prime Minister Dr. Harini Amarasuriya has described the Commonwealth as “a really important forum” for its member countries at a time of growing geopolitical tensions and instability.

Following her first official meeting with Commonwealth Secretary-General Shirley Botchwey at Marlborough House on 21 May, the Prime Minister said institutions such as the Commonwealth build trust and promote understanding during periods of global uncertainty.

She stressed the importance of institutions such as the Commonwealth at a time when multilateralism is under threat and international law is increasingly being challenged and disregarded.

“This [Commonwealth] is a really important forum where the value of cooperation, the value of collaboration, and the value of partnership becomes more meaningful,” Dr. Amarasuriya said.

She added that the Commonwealth’s diverse membership gives it a unique role in bringing countries together and ensuring that different voices are heard.

“The Commonwealth can provide a space for our voices to be heard in a way that highlights some of these values that are being swept aside; values that are really important for countries such as ours,” the Prime Minister added.

Reflecting on current geopolitical tensions, the Prime Minister highlighted that international conflicts continue to have real consequences far beyond the regions directly affected.

She pointed to the effects of the crisis in the Middle East on Sri Lanka, including rising costs for food, fuel, and fertiliser.

“The conflict that we are seeing in the world is not something that is good for anyone. As a Government, we are trying our best to cushion the impact on our people because we think our people deserve a break. But I think the whole world deserves a break right now,” Dr. Amarasuriya said.

While expressing support and “affinity” for the Commonwealth, she said: “This is the time to make these kinds of spaces more meaningful. The Commonwealth could occupy a unique space if it is willing to take up that challenge and make the transition to becoming a really relevant organisation, because this is what this moment demands.”

Looking ahead to the upcoming Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting (CHOGM) in Antigua and Barbuda, the Prime Minister expressed hope that it would be a “historical gathering” for deepening trust and cooperation.

“We cannot survive on our own. We need each other. We need to be responsible for each other and [ensure] that the decisions we take affect each other. We need to take responsibility for our actions in a more meaningful way,” she said.

The Prime Minister during her UK tour undertook several Commonwealth engagements.