Police Sergeant arrested for aiding and abetting “Harak Kata’s” escape bid

A police officer has been arrested on charges of being complicit the foiled attempt by the notorious underworld figure Nadun Chinthaka alias “Harak Kata” to escape custody.

The apprehended officer was identified as a Police Sergeant attached to the Matara Divisional Crimes Investigation Division.

The Terrorism Investigation Division (TID) had arrested the 36-year-old on Wednesday (March 06) for aiding and abetting the infamous criminal gang leader and covering up information vital to the ongoing investigations.

According to the police media division, the suspect was also involved with Jayasekara Withanage Ruwan Chamara alias “Midigama Ruwan” who operates from overseas and orchestrated “Harak Kata’s” escape bid at the CID.

Investigating officers have uncovered a WhatsApp messages exchanged between the arrested police sergeant and “Midigama Ruwan”.

Moreover, it was uncovered that the suspected police officer had been involved with a man known by his alias “Sudda”, who is said to have helped bring in a motorcycle and a helmet to the CID premises to help “Harak Kata’s” escape attempt last year.

The TID is conducting further investigations into the suspect under the provisions of the Prevention of Terrorism Act (PTA).

“Harak Kata” was arrested in Madagascar along with his infamous accomplice Salindu Malshika alias “Kudu Salindu” on March 01, 2023, in a joint operation by the INTERPOL and Malagasy law enforcement authorities and Customs officials.

The duo was brought back to the island after Malagasy defence officials informed the Sri Lankan Foreign Ministry on March 08, 2023, of the arrest of eight suspects including the two Sri Lankan underworld figures.

“Harak Kata” had been wanted by Sri Lanka Police for his involvement in multiple murders and robberies as well as transnational drug trafficking.

While in custody, “Harak Kata” attempted a failed escape bid at the CID premises in September 2023, with the help of several police officers. One such Constable remains at large after fleeing the CID premises and now the police have offered a cash reward of Rs. 2.5 million for a tip-off about the said officer named Munipalage Ravindu Sandeepa Gunasekara.

During the questioning, “Harak Kata” had allegedly requested to go to the washroom and was escorted out of the interrogation room with his accomplice – the police constable, and another sub-inspector attached to the Police Special Task Force (STF), assigned for the suspect’s protection.

Although his handcuffs were removed at that point, the underworld kingpin had then walked out of the washroom acting as if he was still cuffed and had then attempted to snatch the STF officer’s firearm leading to a scuffle.

A group of other CID officers were quick to arrive at the scene, upon hearing the commotion and managed to detain “Harak Kata” in their custody.

Amidst the altercation, the aforementioned constable had reportedly fled the CID premises and remains in hiding to date while certain reports have claimed that he is presumed to have fled the country.

A police constable, a former army sniper and several others are currently in custody in connection with the incident.