Global South’s desire to establish independence hinted at Sri Lanka-Iran leaders’ talk

ECONOMYNEXT – Sri Lanka President Ranil Wickremesinghe has highlighted the Global South’s desire to establish its identity and independence during the talks with Iranian President Ebrahim Raisi, President’s Media Division (PMD) said.

Most developing nations are depending on developed nations and such dependence has deprived most developing nations of being with its own identity and independence.

According to the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development (UNCTAD), the Global South broadly comprises Africa, Latin America and the Caribbean, Asia (excluding Israel, Japan, and South Korea), and Oceania (excluding Australia and New Zealand).

Most of the Global South’s countries are commonly identified as lacking in their standard of living, which includes having lower incomes, high levels of poverty, high population growth rates, inadequate housing, limited educational opportunities, and deficient health systems, among other issues.

Additionally, these countries’ cities are characterized by their poor infrastructure.

Iran President Raisi is in Sri Lanka for a half a day visit to launch a Tehran-funded Uma Oya multipurpose development project  and to sign five bilateral deals. His visit comes 10 days after Iran attacked Israel.

“Following the inauguration of the Uma Oya multipurpose development project, President Ranil Wickremesinghe expressed gratitude to Iran for their technical support,” the PMD said in a statement.

“He highlighted the south’s desire to establish its identity & independence, suggesting that southern countries should now strive for their own strength and autonomy.”

President’s statement comes as Sri Lanka is heavily under pressure to address its past human rights violations mainly by the Western nations like the United States, Britain, Canada, and some European Union nations, which are mostly in the Global North group.

Global North broadly comprises Northern America and Europe, Israel, Japan, South Korea, Australia, and New Zealand.

Political analysts say Sri Lanka has been trying to follow a non-aligned policy, but some political leaders want to go with an emerging world order with countries like China, Iran, and Russia in the face of direct and indirect interventions by the West.

The island nation has witnessed a pro-Chinese foreign policy from 2010-2015 and a pro-Indian from 2015-2017 amid government changes after elections.

President Wickremesinghe government, however, has stick to a non-aligned foreign policy with giving the island nation’s India a priority. However, the government has continued its relations with China, Russia, and Iran despite heavy pressure from the West to act otherwise. (Colombo/April 24/2022)