Sri Lanka’s voters will be overjoyed by NPP govt’s first cabinet decision: ex MP

ECONOMYNEXT — Sri Lanka’s voters watching the evening news on the first day of a National People’s Power (NPP) government will be overjoyed to the point of dropping their dinner upon hearing the first ever cabinet decision of the new government, a spokesman said.

Former parliamentarian and NPP executive member Samatnha Vidyaratne told a crowd of supporters that the first decision taken at an NPP government’s inaugural cabinet meeting will be to suspend pensions and official residences given to former presidents.

“Once we have formed a government through your vote, you can learn on the evening news about the decisions taken at the first cabinet meeting. If you’re sitting down with your plate of rice, be careful, because you’ll be so overjoyed you might drop your plate,” said Vaidyaratne.

“This will be our first cabinet decision: As per the decisions taken at the NPP’s inaugural cabinet meeting, as of midnight tonight, all pensions and residences given to former presidents of Sri Lanka will be abolished.”

The former MP said Sri Lanka’s ruling class has so far enacted laws that would ensure generational wealth for their families.

“These people made laws to ensure that generations of their descendants will live in luxury. Luxury for them, sorrow for us,” he said.

The leftist NPP has been leading at least one opinion poll on voting intent for the presidential election due to be held between September 17 and October 18 this year.

The NPP’s rivals including members of the government and the main opposition Samagi Jana Balawegaya (SJB) have accused the party, led by the Marxist-Leninist Janatha Vimukthi Peramuna (JVP), of making unrealistic promises to voters without revealing a detailed plan of action.

Critics also claim that a majority of the NPP’s newfound supporters were people who had voted for ousted president Gotabaya Rajapaksa at the 2019 presidential election. (Colombo/Mar29/2024)