The doctor’s dilemma

It was not just yesterday, or the day before, that this subject was discussed. In fact, it was over a century ago that George Bernard Shaw, the famous Irish playwright, wrote the play, ‘The Doctor’s Dilemma’ that was first staged in 1906. It was published in book-form in 1909. It was considered a ‘problem play’ – a form of drama that emerged during the 19th century, dealing with contentious social issues which were debated on stage.

Would you believe that ‘The Doctor’s Dilemma’ was about moral dilemmas created by limited medical resources and the conflicts between the demands of private medicine as a business and as a vocation?

What do we see today? Not much seems to have changed between the early 1900s in England and the present day in Sri Lanka.

The whole nation now knows that of Dr. Maheshi Wijeratne, specialist neurosurgeon and consultant to the Sri Jayawardenepura Teaching Hospital (SJP TH), has been arrested, remanded and released on bail by the Chief Magistrates Court, Colombo, on a complaint filed by the Commission to Investigate Allegations of Bribery and Corruption (CIABOC). The arrest and remanding has disturbed a hornet’s nest, not only in the social media, amongst patients and elite societal circles, but also, significantly within the medical community.

What is disturbing to me, having been a medical teacher for nearly 45 years and a medical ethicist for many decades, is the lack of clarity amongst the doctors about Dr. Maheshi Wijeratne’s purported offence. This is the current doctors’ dilemma that I have been keenly observing and the main reason for this short essay.

According to reports circulating in the media, a few doctors have resigned from the SJP TH. An unexpected consequence of this has been, according to news items in the mainstream and social media, that doctors at SJP Hospital, and elsewhere, have refused to issue prescriptions to patients, or next of kin, for purchase of drugs, or other required items in the open market, for fear of being arrested. Is this reaction of some doctors in the Ministry of Health (MoH) a ‘healthy trend’? It is said that it is out of a genuine concern, and worry, that what they were doing routinely before, will now be construed to be “corruption”. Or, is it a collective response against the initiative taken by the CIABOC in solidarity with the plight of Dr. Maheshi Wijeratne? Or could it be a sense of ‘collective guilt’?

This fallout has/would jeopardise the health and lives of patients seeking treatment from SJP TH and other State sector hospitals.

Is this reaction by the doctors a reasonable reaction? Or is it an exaggerated knee-jerk response that would be seen by many doctors, as well as the public, as a surreptitious collective attempt in defence of Dr. Maheshi Wijeratne?

The Health Minister, Dr. Nalinda Jayatissa’s attempt to defuse the situation, and, maybe, prevent a nationwide move to embarrass the government and the Health Ministry, may have not have had the desired effect.

Understandably, the arrest of Dr. Maheshi Wijeratne came at a bad time when the antics of the former Health Minister Rambukwella and his family, and the then Secretary/Health, have resulted in them being repeatedly under remand custody and now being indicted on charges of unlawfully acquiring assets. The Rambukwella family case is much clearer and leaves little to the imagination and should not be used in comparison with the neurosurgeon’s case.

It also must be remembered that this is certainly not the first time that Dr. Maheshi Wijertne has literally “hit the headlines”. Her actions as a doctor, quite apart from being a neurosurgeon, regarding the Duminda Silva case, has been much criticised.

I believe that the issues of her serious ‘conflict of interest’ in this case would be a very useful vignette/case study/scenario in the teaching/learning programmes in medical ethics in the years to come.

To return to the issue at hand – i.e., the refusal of some specialists/doctors to give prescriptions for medicines and other purchases from “outside”, l think is counterproductive. The doctors seem to have behaved in an excessive demonstration of “protectionism”. A more circumspect, logical and analytical approach has been taken by the Association of Medical Specialists (AMS) in their letter to the Health Minister.

It must be remembered that specialists giving prescriptions to patients for purchases from “outside” is nothing new. And there have been no previous incidents of arrests and remanding for the same. Even though reliable stories are many in the past of specialists having “deals” with pharmacies, private laboratories and medical device providers.

We need to accept that the arrest and detention of Dr. Maheshi Wijeratne was an event that was waiting to happen for many years! It is an exceptional case and certainly not the norm. Why should honest, bona fide doctors and specialists, who have been genuine in their prescriptions, be perturbed? Surely, the CIABOC will not hound honest doctors doing their duty by their patients? Only those specialists who have been in league with private sector providers of special medicines (especially in oncology) and of medical devices (stents in cardiology) need be disturbed. They, certainly, have cause for concern. Their conscience will be troubling them now, since they are prone to be ‘next on the list’.

In this context, please allow me to digress, albeit briefly, into the worldwide phenomenon of ‘conflict of interest’ between the doctor and the pharmaceutical industry – the ‘Big Pharma’.

To understand the fundamental contradiction between doctors and the drug industry, one must realise that the medical profession has to place patients before self and should work for the maximum benefit of the patient (the concept of fidelity). Beneficence (doing good) or at least, non-maleficence (doing no harm) are other guiding principles. In addition, doctors today are expected to engage in the advocacy for patients – identifying their needs and working for developments in human and physical resource allocations for improvement in healthcare delivery.

In contrast, in the pharmaceutical industry, the guiding principle is profit; research and development of new drugs based on not need, but market demand and profit; research to be the market-leader for profit; service and charity with a view to societal acceptance and development of benevolent institutional images for profit. Some may consider this too harsh a formulation, but I believe this to be a realistic assessment of the present condition.

The relationship between the doctor and the pharmaceutical industry is necessary, unavoidable, but ethically controversial. Furthermore, the public have a right to be concerned if they feel that professional advice offered to them may have been influenced by financial or other benefits offered to medical professionals by commercial interests. The British Medical Association in its publication ‘Philosophy and Practice of Medical Ethics‘ observes that “The medical profession has an obligation to assure the public that treatment offered is appropriate and is justified by its intrinsic merit, uninfluenced by commercial or financial interests. This is especially important in relation to pharmaceutical products.”.

From the innumerable conversations I have had on this subject with many medical colleagues, I have the impression that they tend to believe that doctors are in control of the relationship between them and the drug companies. This sense of ‘well-being’ is near universal among the medical fraternity. In a study done in the Department of Medicine, University of California, in San Francisco, only 39% admitted that “industry promotions and contacts influenced their own prescribing”, but ironically, “84% believed that other doctors’ prescribing was affected”. In other words, the well-researched phenomenon of ‘actor-observer bias’ – that is, the belief that “others are more susceptible to temptation…” than you are – was clearly seen.

Some analysts of this relationship believe that it is the ‘naivety of the medical professional’ to not know that the marketing strategies of pharmaceutical companies are well researched. Paul Witkowski, Director of Pharmacy at Alliance, Ohio, USA, goes further. He says that “Every word and action of pharmaceutical sales representatives has been carefully choreographed and examined in front of ‘reactor panels’ in order to make the best impact of their product in the limited amount of ‘fact time’ they are permitted by their physician

customers. It is extremely successful; that’s why they do it.”

The doctors are showered with biased drug literature and free samples of medicines. This can be considered to relate directly to information transfer to the physicians. What is of greater concern is that ‘gifts’ are given to doctors to influence their prescription practices. These include anything from prescription pads, pens, paperweights to personalised executive diaries and annual subscriptions to medical journals and even to ‘Newsweek’ or ‘Time’ magazine; from sponsoring medical symposia and connected social events, organised by medical associations; with dinner invitations to 5-star hotels; to all expense paid trips abroad to attend international medical conventions.

These are but a few of the temptations that even ethical and honest doctors face in the ‘World of Global Medicine’ today. This, I believe, is the most predominant dilemma that all doctors, the world over, are confronted with.

But what about the deliberately dishonest doctors? Those without any empathy (or even sympathy or compassion) will exploit a patient and extract as much money as they can. These are the doctors who have ‘deals’ with suppliers and providers of medicines and devices. What of them? They are also a cross-section of any society. It is for the general public, the patients, honest and ethical doctors and also the CIABOC and other agencies to help society to separate the grain from the chaff. So that society will uphold the grain and discard the chaff from society. We need ‘whistleblowers’ within our medical community. This cannot be done if too many in the medical community, almost reflexively, become protective – irrespective of the specificity of a given situation. In our country, the Law, based on Roman Dutch Law and English Common Law, ensures that any accused is innocent until proven guilty. Hence, Dr. Maheshi Wijeratne will remain innocent until her case is completed and the judgement is given.

I strongly believe that we, medical professionals, need to be on the right side of the medical ethical divide even in the most difficult of circumstances, and not, in our short-sighted and anxious haste, be on the ‘other’ side.

We, as medical professionals, must not be seen as “protectionist” in the face of serious allegations of financial misdemeanors, corruption or frauds perpetrated against patients. Unconscionable margins (profits) between the purchaser and the seller is unacceptable in any commercial transaction. This becomes grossly unacceptable when doctors are sometimes seen to play intermediary ‘business’ roles between the two.

Let the Law take its course. It will take its time. The hype and sensationalism will soon die out. Dr. Maheshi Wijeratne has every right to her defence without too many flash bulbs and news-hounds. Life will return to normal. I hope where medical professionals are concerned, it will be a ‘new normal’. Will it come to pass? Or will it soon be ‘back to the status quo’?

To paraphrase a famous saying attributed to the Greeks, “The mills of justice grind slowly, but it grinds exceedingly small”.

I know that what I have stated here may not be taken too kindly by some of my professional colleagues.

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.