Melsta Health relaunches Melsta Pharmacy and opens exclusive Melsta Labs Collection Center

Initiating an exciting new chapter in their pharmacy venture, Melsta Health recently relaunched their flagship Melsta Pharmacy at 453, Galle Road, Colombo 03, with a new outlook and enhanced facilities. Complementing the array of new features at Melsta Pharmacy, an Exclusive Melsta Labs Sample Collection Center was also launched at the same location.

Situated at the heart of Colombo’s bustling commercial hub, Melsta Pharmacy takes center stage in one of the city’s busiest neighborhoods. With ample parking, the newly relaunched space is designed for accessibility, catering to a diverse clientele, from local residents to visitors. The flagship Melsta Pharmacy stands out with its captivating modern customer-centric design, aligning seamlessly with the latest global standards. Offering more than just pharmaceutical services, customers can expect an exceptional experience coupled with best-in-class services, all at the most affordable costs.

The official relaunch ceremony was honored by the presence of distinguished personalities, including Royle Janz, Deputy Chairman – Melstacorp PLC/Chairman – Melsta Hospitals Ragama, Sampath Perera, Managing Director – Melstacorp PLC/Executive Director – Melsta Hospitals Ragama, Dr. Iraivan Thiyagarajah, Executive Director – Melsta Hospitals Ragama/CEO of Hospital Management – Melsta Health, Ms. Roshitta Nirooshan, General Manager – Melsta Hospitals Ragama, and Jerad Daniel, General Manager – Melsta Labs.

Dr. Iraivan Thiyagarajah, Executive Director of Melsta Hospitals Ragama and CEO of Hospital Management at Melsta Health, emphasized the strategic significance of the flagship Melsta Pharmacy. “The flagship store of Melsta Pharmacy is situated in a strategically important location and serves as a testament to Melsta Health’s vision to provide world-class healthcare services. Therefore, it’s paramount for us to continuously upgrade the space in line with evolving global standards. The relaunch reflects our commitment to excellence and our continuous efforts to offer the best to our customers,” he stated.

Access Motors redefines automotive care with the launch of Absolute Detailing and Tyre Shop at IOC premises, Colombo

Transfer of JKH’s 61.9 million stocks boosts CSE turnover past Rs. 12 billion mark

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.