CA Sri Lanka’s newly launched Forensic Accounting Faculty a timely national initiative, says IGP

Inspector General of Police (IGP) Priyantha Weerasooriya on Thursday commended the Institute of Chartered Accountants of Sri Lanka (CA Sri Lanka), highlighting that the newly launched specialised Forensic Accounting and Investigation Faculty was a timely national initiative.

Speaking at the launch ceremony held at the institute, Weerasooriya, who was the chief guest at the occasion, said, “The law enforcement agencies, including the Sri Lanka Police, require strong collaboration with highly trained professional accountants and forensic experts. By building specialised human capital, expertise and modern investigative competencies, CA Sri Lanka is directly contributing to strengthening our nation’s resilience against economic crimes.”

Speaking further, he said modern financial crimes, cyber fraud, money laundering and complex corporate irregularities are no longer confined within the local boundaries. They have become sophisticated, highly networked and highly globalised.

“In our present Sri Lankan context, as our country moves steadily towards economic recovery and long-term financial stability, safeguarding our financial infrastructure is paramount. Criminal activities such as financial fraud not only drain economic resources but also damage institutional integrity and investor confidence.”

He made these comments in the presence of guest of honour Financial Crimes Investigation Division Deputy Inspector General of Police M.D.P. Dayaratne as well as CA Sri Lanka President Tishan Subasinghe, Vice President Anoji de Silva, Forensic Accounting and Investigation Committee Chairman Ashane Jayasekera, members of the council and Chief Executive Officer Lakmali Priyangika.

Speaking further he said that traditional investigative methods are no longer sufficient to tackle these intricate financial crimes. From an operational perspective within the Sri Lanka Police, the law enforcement officers face mounting contemporary challenges when investigating modern financial crimes.

“Without rigorous forensic accounting capabilities integrated at the early stage of an investigation, crucial evidence may be overlooked or rendered inadmissible,” Weerasooriya explained.

“I’m warmly commending CA Sri Lanka for taking this forward-thinking approach to create a platform dedicated to fostering expertise, knowledge sharing and professional collaboration in forensic investigation. May this initiative play an important role in ensuring transparency, accountability and financial security across Sri Lanka,” Weerasooriya added.

As part of its inaugural offering, the faculty will introduce two programmes in October 2026: Certified Professional Forensic Investigator and Digital Forensics for Finance Professionals, both designed to build specialised capabilities in investigating financial crime and addressing the growing complexity of digital evidence.

Dayaratne also echoed the sentiments of Weerasooriya, reiterating that the establishment of the faculty by CA Sri Lanka is not merely a milestone but a timely national imperative.

“For decades CA Sri Lanka has stood as the guardian of financial integrity and corporate governance in our nation. Today, by inaugurating this specialised faculty, we are sharpening our national defences against one of the most insidious threats of the modern era, which is financial crime, corruption and money laundering,” he said.

Speaking further, Dayaratne emphasised that accountants, auditors and financial managers are the true gatekeepers of our economy.

“They are the first line of defence. Long before a law enforcement officer looks at a financial statement, an auditor or financial accountant has already touched those numbers. So, with this current trend, we must move beyond passive tick-box auditing and we have to adopt a forensic mindset, inquiring why transactions occur, where funds originate and who ultimately benefits,” he said.

He also called on the professionals to embrace their responsibility to report suspicious transactions and activities, noting that equipping the accountancy profession with specialised forensic skills would enable the auditors to move beyond their traditional role and develop the capabilities required to support investigations and deliver court-admissible financial evidence.

Delivering his speech, Subasinghe said, “By upskilling and reskilling our own members and other stakeholders who are interested in following these particular programmes and developing the required expertise, we are sure that they will fight against corporate fraud and corruption, with the technical know-how that they are going to gain by following our programmes.”

“I believe this combination of a professional qualification in forensic accounting, together with practical exposure to digital forensics, will provide an important foundation for developing the next generation of forensic professionals,” Jayasekera said.

The faculty’s Alternate Chairman Dr. Mudith Sujeewa highlighted the impact of employee fraud and the importance of behavioural red flags and forensic accounting education in strengthening fraud prevention.