Hayleys Mobility launches all-new JAECOO J5 HEV in Sri Lanka

From left: Hayleys Fentons Limited Executive Director Sujith De Alwis, Hayleys Fentons Limited Managing Director Hasith Prematillake, Hayleys Mobility Limited Chief Executive Officer Rajieve Fernando and Hayleys Mobility Limited Executive Director Roshani Dharmaratne with the all-new JAECOO J5 HEV

Broadening its range of high-performance hybrid SUVs to meet the evolving demands of Sri Lanka’s growing new energy vehicle market, Hayleys Mobility Limited, the mobility arm of Hayleys Fentons Limited, introduced the all-new ‘JAECOO J5 HEV’ in Colombo recently.

Manufactured by China’s leading passenger vehicle exporter Chery Automobile, the ‘JAECOO J5 HEV’ is designed to meet the evolving needs of modern-day motorists, combining intelligent hybrid performance, advanced safety features, and premium comfort, to deliver a versatile driving experience across both urban environments and long-distance travel.

Powered by a 1.5L Turbo GDI engine paired with an electric motor and Dedicated Hybrid Transmission (DHT), the JAECOO J5 HEV delivers a combined output of 221 hp and 295 Nm of torque. This enables responsive performance, with 0–100 km/h acceleration achieved in 7.9 seconds, while maintaining smooth performance across varying driving conditions.

Complementing its performance capabilities, the hybrid system delivers fuel efficiency of 18.9 km per litre (5.3 L/100 km) and a combined driving range exceeding 950 km on a full tank, helping drivers reduce fuel stops while supporting lower day-to-day operating costs.

Available in Alpine Green, Zircon Grey, Snowy White, Glacier Blue and Canyon Black body colours, the J5 HEV carries a bold, purposeful exterior, with a wide stance and a sharp LED lighting signature that reinforces its premium character. Inside, the vehicle offers a refined cabin experience characterised by comfort, intuitive technology, and thoughtful design. Priced at Rs. 19.9 million, the JAECOO J5 HEV is supported by a comprehensive 7-year vehicle warranty, and an 8-year battery warranty. Speaking to Mirror Business on the current consumer demand and market outlook for new energy vehicles in the country, Hayleys Fentons Limited Managing Director Hasith Prematillake said, the consumer response towards new energy vehicles has been very good so far.  The surge in demand he said is driven by both environment and economic factors.

“When you look at the duty structure, electric vehicles always attract a better price than a similar petrol or diesel vehicle. That indirectly has encouraged more electric vehicles into the country.

“We also see many players entering this vehicle segment in Sri Lanka, which is complementing each other. We like to see more models, more competition, because that will make people get used to new energy vehicles and build confidence. Right now 70 percent of the market is petrol and Diesel, and 30 percent new energy.”

Prematillake also noted that the country can save a lot of dollars on fuel imports by switching into new energy vehicles, as Sri Lanka currently bears an annual fuel import expenditure of around US$ 4 billion.

“There’s so much of hydro, solar and wind power in this country that is coming almost free. Wind and hydro together account for about 50 percent of the total electricity generation in the country at present, and the target set for 2030 is 70 percent. With battery energy storage coming up, there’ll be more encouragement for daytime solar generation,” he added.

Hayleys Fentons Managing Director called on the government to reinstate the loan to value ratio for electric vehicles back to 90 percent or at least 80 percent, in order further encourage new energy vehicles into the country. Having in place a strong ecosystem of sales, after-sales support network, technical expertise and customer care, Hayleys Mobility said it is confident the JAECOO J5 HEV will become another success story in its new energy vehicle journey in Sri Lanka.