Sri Lanka ruling party hasn’t decided it’ll back president at the polls: MP

ECONOMYNEXT — The decision makers of the ruling Sri Lanka Podujana Peramuna (SLPP) has not named President Ranil Wickremesinghe the party’s candidate for the upcoming presidential election despite personal opinions expressed by some members, MP Tissa Kuttiarachchi said.

“We don’t ever say Mr Wickremesinghe is our candidate. He is the leader of the United National Party (UNP). This was proved at the UNP’s maiden rally over the weekend. UNP deputy leader Akila Viraj Kariyawasam took Mr Wickremesnighe there as the president of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka and the leader of the UNP,” said Kuttiarachchi.

“There is no problem with Mr Wickremesinghe being named the UNP’s candidate. But the higher echelons of the SLPP has not yet for any reason decided that he is the party’s candidate,” he said.

The SLPP legislator told reporters it’s not fair that individual members express their personal opinion when they’re representing a party.

“Some people express their personal opinion. I don’t think that’s fair, expressing personal opinions while representing a party. Anyway, people have their opinions, but the party hasn’t decided this,” he said.

SLPP parliamentarian Piyal Nisthantha said on March 04 that the party’s national organiser Basil Rajapaksa would take a decision on whether the SLPP would contest the 2024 presidential election on its own or support a candidate fielded by an alliance the party is part of.

The SLPP’s executive committee, headed by Rajapaksa, said Nishantha, will decide whether to form an alliance and “provide an opportunity to a candidate” or field its own candidate at the presidential poll that’s due to be held between September 17 and October 17 this year.

President Ranil Wickremesinghe has said that a presidential election will be held this year before a parliamentary election in 2025. However, some opposition groups have expressed uncertainty over the matter.

In a recent interview with India’s WION network, Wickremesinghe was noncommittal about contesting the presidential election that should constitutionally be held by at least October 17 this year. He did, however, say “both presidential and parliament” elections are due when asked about elections happening in 2024.

Asked how optimistic he is of his own chances, Wickremesinghe said: “For me to be back, I must contest.”

When pressed for his plan, he said: “I have come here to put the economy into order. My first order is to focus on that we get out of bankruptcy.”

There was no confirmation from the president that he would definitely be running.

Meanwhile, there are reports that Wickremesinghe wishes to abolish the executive presidency.

However, the UNP’s maiden rally held on Sunday March 10 had the hallmarks of a campaign launch, but there were no clear announcement that Wickremesinghe plans to run. (Colombo/Mar12/2024)