M A Sumanthiran offers full support to new Sri Lanka ITAK leader Sritharan

ECONOMYNEXT — Parliamentarian M A Sumanthiran extends his fullest support to his Jaffna district colleague S Srithanan who was elected leader of the Ilankai Thamil Arasu Kachchi (ITAK), the main constituent party of Sri Lanka’s opposition Tamil National Alliance (TNA), the former said.

Speaking to party members and supporters following the election on Sunday January 21, Sumanthiran acknowledged that Sritharan was elected democratically by the ITAK, demonstrating the party’s commitment to democracy.

“In electing the leader of our party, we demonstrated both locally and internationally the internal democracy of our party. I congratulate my friend Sritharan who won the election. We both have a responsibility of our party. This is something to celebrate,” the privately owned NewsFirst network quoted Sumanthiran as saying in Tamil.

“Let us embark on this journey together, always. I’d like to extend my fullest support to Sridaran who was democratically elected as party leader,” he added, taking Sritharan’s hand in celebration, to applause from the crowd.

Sritharan said Sunday’s election result marks a new beginning for ITAK.

“We have written a new chapter in our party’s history through democratic dialogue and democratic process. This has inspired confidence in many people. Many young people have placed their trust in the party.

“The party is important. We have spoken many times about the strength of our unity. All of us will work together,” he said.

Media reports said the election for the ITAK leadership was held in Trincomalee in the form of a secret ballot.

Sritharan won the election securing 184 votes against Sumanthiran’s 137.

There was some speculation in the run-up to the ballot that Sumanthiran was faovurite to win.

The TNA was formed in 2004 with ITAK leading five other parties. Following the 2020 parliamentary election, which the TNA contested for ITAK’s symbol, holds 10 seats.

The TNA has engaged in several rounds of discussions with President Ranil Wickremesinghe on a permanent solution to Sri Lanka’s decades-long ethnic issue. (Colombo/Jan22/2024)