Colombo Plan boosts Sri Lanka Ports staff capacity

ECONOMYNEXT – The Colombo Plan, a regional inter-governmental organization with 28 countries is helping build capacity at Sri Lanka Ports Authority through a three-year maritime advisory program (MAP).

The program aims to help Sri Lanka meet complex maritime challenges and focuses on enhancing maritime safety, security, and connectivity with an aim to foster collaboration and knowledge exchange.

“This project aims to enhance SLPA’s human resource capabilities through professional training in alignment with global standards and best practices,” the Colombo Plan said.

“This three-year project consists of several key activities, including port study-exchanges, capacity building initiatives, and the facilitation of international maritime expert advisory visits to SLPA.”

The MAP program has funding support from the US Department of State’s Bureau of South and Central Asian Affairs via the US Embassy in Colombo.

The Colombo Plan is the only intergovernmental organization based in Sri Lanka, and implemented programmes including the Drug Advisory Programme (DAP), Gender Affairs Programme (GAP), Capacity Building Programme (CBP), and the Programme for Economic and Climate Change (ECC).

A collaboration between The Colombo Plan and the Commercial Law Development Program (CLDP) of the US Department of Commerce saw a Public Private Partnerships Workshop on the port sector conducted by the Rebel Group (Netherlands) Senior Port Consultant Wim Welvaarts, and Rohan Masakorala, Lead Consultant for The Colombo Plan Port of Colombo Capacity Building Project.

It was coordinated by Lindsey Scannell, Senior Counsel at CLDP, and Maxwell Gruber, Senior International Program Specialist. Romesh David, CEO of SAGT, contributed as a guest speaker.

SLPA participants engaged in discussions regarding methods of implementing public-private partnership systems at the Port of Colombo to enhance and strengthen its operations.

The first workshop of The Colombo Plan MAP focused on ‘Empowering Communications for Maritime Connectivity’.

It was attended by the Secretary General of The Colombo Plan, Benjamin P Reyes, Dustin Bickel, Regional Indo-Pacific Strategy Coordinator, John Wise – the Deputy Director for Security Assistance, and SLPA Chairman Keith Bernard.

The communications workshop is an important focus area for SLPA as they engage with international and local clients in day-to-day maritime related work. The objective of the training session was to enhance capabilities and professionalism of the executive staff when dealing with global clients as a hub port in Asia to provide effective and efficient services.

SLPA delegates also participated in a port study visit to the Port of Virginia Authority (VPA), Norfolk in the US.

The VPA is branded a ‘Smart Port’ in the US East coast with its automated and highly efficient port management

systems. A smart port like the Virginia port integrates advanced technology and data-driven solutions to optimize operations, enhance efficiency, and improve connectivity.

During the visit, SLPA signed a Memorandum of Cooperation (MoC) with the Virginia Port Authority on information and knowledge exchange for mutual growth and enhanced connectivity.

The visit encompassed engagements with US government bodies, the Bureau of Economic and Business Affairs and the Bureau of South and Central Asian Affairs, focusing on policy frameworks and international relations in port management.

Discussions with the World Bank, the International Finance Corporation and the USAID addressed funding mechanisms and investment opportunities, while visits to Virginia Ports Authority terminals, the Department of Transportation, Givens Logistics and CMA CGM Headquarters, offered practical insights into port operations and logistics.

Academic engagement with ODU Maritime Studies highlighted maritime cybersecurity and supply chain management.

The Colombo Plan also conducted the Skill Connect Training Course on Effective Negotiation for Maritime Professionals organized for 40 SLPA staff members.

Facilitated by Tissa Dissanayake, this intensive two-day course focused on enhancing the negotiation skills of maritime professionals. Key areas covered included identifying different types of negotiators, mapping individual negotiation challenges, leveraging relationships, and distinguishing between positional and integrative bargaining strategies.

The training provided participants insights and practical tools to improve their negotiation capabilities within the maritime industry.

The Colombo plans to have a cyber security project and a peer advisory mission later this year. (Colombo/Sep20/2024)