SLT‑mobitel among Sri Lanka’s top employers for 2026

SLT-Mobitel CEO M. Riyaaz Rasheed accepts 2026 AICPA & CIMA Top 20 Employers Recognition Award from John Graham, FCMA (UK), CGMA, President of CIMA and Co-Chair of AICPA and Venkkat Ramanan, FCMA (UK), CGMA, Vice President Asia Pacific, AICPA & CIMA

In recognition of the efforts championing talent development, nurturing innovation and building a high‑performance culture, SLT‑Mobitel was ranked among Sri Lanka’s Top 20 Employers for 2026, as announced by AICPA & CIMA.  AICPA & CIMA, acknowledged as the Association of International Certified Professional Accountants, recently revealed the list at a gala event held at Cinnamon Life.

The event was graced by John Graham, FCMA (UK), CGMA, President, CIMA and Co-Chair, Association of International Certified Professional Accountants.

The gala was also attended by diverse members of Sri Lanka’s management accounting community, with affiliations spanning across CIMA, SLT-Mobitel and the Nebula Institute of Technology.

The distinction highlights the group’s steadfast focus on employee growth, well‑being and investment in the strength of its workforce of over 7000-strong.

Supporting its transformation from a traditional Telco to a next-generation TechCo, the group continues to invest in learning, reskilling and workforce agility. The endeavour seeks to empower the employees, allowing them to rapidly adapt to evolving technological and business demands while delivering stronger customer and in-house experiences.  Guided by the HR philosophy ‘Our People are Our Customers’ Advantage’, the group ensures its workforce is at the centre of its digital transformation journey.

The employees are trained in emerging technologies including artificial intelligence (AI), cloud computing and 5G. the flagship programmes, including Smart Technician, Smart Technical Officer and Smart Sales Officer, produce teams capable of excelling evenly across both technical and customer‑facing roles.

The Nebula Institute of Technology, the education arm of SLT-Mobitel, offers globally recognised degree and diploma programmes in partnership with the University of Hertfordshire and Pearson UK respectively. In 2025 alone, more than 25,000 internal trainees and more than 1,000 external students advanced their knowledge in robotics, data science and fibre technologies.

Organisational structure and workforce optimisation, HR digital transformation, talent development, capability acceleration and employee engagement remain key pillars of SLT-Mobitel’s HR strategy.  The group also advanced HR transformation through robotic process automation, AI and automation across key processes, alongside the launch of the Neylie employee app and AI-powered ‘Ask HR’ platform to enhance employee experiences.

A strong focus is consistently placed on high-performance culture within SLT-Mobitel through enhanced performance management practices, employee recognition programmes such as Monthly Champions and Annual Excellence Awards and engagement initiatives supported by open communication and constructive industrial relations that enable collaboration and uninterrupted value delivery.

The group is also committed to diversity, equity, inclusion and belonging. Inclusive hiring practices, flexible work models and employee resource groups ensure every individual is valued. Through university partnerships and employee advocacy, SLT‑Mobitel continues to build its reputation as an employer of choice in Sri Lanka’s ICT sector.

Through these initiatives, SLT‑Mobitel reaffirms its recognition as a Top Employer and showcases a genuine investment in its people and Sri Lanka’s digital future.