HUTCH triumphs with six wins at SLIM Digis 2024

HUTCH, one of Sri Lanka’s leading mobile networks, has once again distinguished itself for its digital marketing excellence, winning an outstanding six awards at the SLIM Digis 2024 – 1 Gold, 4 Silvers and a Bronze. As the only telecom company to have gained recognition at the SLIM Digis this year, HUTCH showcased its forward-thinking approach to digital engagement and its commitments to innovation in a highly dynamic market. This year also marked HUTCH’s first-ever SLIM Digis GOLD award in the category of Best Performance Marketing Campaign, reflecting on the operator’s steadfast commitment to driving exceptional results.

In addition to the GOLD award, HUTCH secured SILVER awards for: Best Use of Agile/Moment Marketing, which highlighted the brand’s capability to swiftly adapt and engage with consumers in real time; Best Digital/Social Platform Integration, celebrating HUTCH’s seamless blend of digital and social platforms in its campaigns; and Best Digital Marketing Campaigns in Telecom for its 9 Apps and Bill Shock initiatives (2 SILVER awards). The operator also received a BRONZE award for Best Use of Creator/Influencer Content, recognising HUTCH’s skill in leveraging influencer content to connect with a diverse audience.

Discussing the achievements, Hamdhy Hassen – Chief Marketing Officer at HUTCH said, “These awards reflect our unwavering commitment to digital excellence and our dedication to pushing the boundaries. The accolades also serve as a powerful validation of our innovative approach to digital marketing and customer engagement, and we’re honoured to be acknowledged by SLIM Digis 2024. We look forward to continuing to elevate our customer experience and the effectiveness of our communications as one of Sri Lanka’s premier mobile networks.”

The prestigious SLIM Digis Awards programme celebrates Sri Lanka’s best digital marketing endeavours, showcasing the innovation and talent that fuels the region’s expanding influence on the global digital industry. Judged by renowned professionals in business, marketing, and digital spheres, the awards uphold international standards and align with global benchmarks.

HUTCH Sri Lanka, a subsidiary of CK Hutchison Holdings (CKHH), is a major player in the Sri Lankan telecom industry. CKHH, a Hong Kong-based Fortune 500 conglomerate, operates in over 50 countries across six sectors, including Telecommunications, and reported revenues nearing USD 60 billion in 2023.

Entering the Sri Lankan market in 1997, HUTCH has grown significantly, launching GSM services in 2004, 3G in 2011, and 4G in 2018. The 2019 acquisition of Etisalat Sri Lanka further strengthened its market presence, enabling it to serve customers on both 078 and 072 prefixes. Currently, HUTCH’s 4G network covers 95% of Sri Lanka’s population, and the company is 5G-ready to support the nation’s digital aspirations.

With affordable, reliable connectivity, HUTCH serves as a key driver in Sri Lanka’s telecommunications growth, expanding access to communication, business efficiency, and entertainment across even the most remote regions.

SLT-MOBITEL recognised as the Fastest 4G Mobile Network by Ookla®

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.