Pathfinder Foundation and Ananta Aspen Centre to examine prospects for India-Sri Lanka physical connectivity

In collaboration with Ananta Aspen Centre of India, the Pathfinder Foundation will hold a virtual roundtable titled “Bridging Borders: Enhancing connectivity between India and Sri Lanka” on 19 July.

The Pathfinder Foundation has established a dedicated Study Group to craft a comprehensive blueprint to enhance physical connectivity between India and Sri Lanka.  This initiative envisions transforming Sri Lanka into a logistic and energy hub for the region, aiming to boost the country’s annual growth rate beyond 6% in the foreseeable future.

The roundtable will focus on digital connectivity and physical and maritime connectivity. Trilegal Rahul Matthan and Carnegie India Director Dr. Rudra Chaudhuri have been invited to present papers on digital connectivity. LIRNEasia Chairperson Prof. Rohan Samarajiva and Information and Communication Technology of ICTA CEO Mahesh Perera will participate as discussants.

Pathfinder Foundation Study Group on India-Sri Lanka Physical Connectivity Convenor Eng. R.W.R. Pemasiri who was the Ministry of Transport and Highways former Secretary and South Asia Gateway Terminals of the Port of Colombo CEO Romesh David will be the discussants on physical and maritime connectivity. The Indian Express former National Editor Nirupama Subramanian will join as a discussant.

The Pathfinder-Ananta roundtable aims to evaluate the current physical connectivity between the two countries across various sectors, including roads, railways, energy infrastructure, and ports.  The discussion will focus on identifying key challenges and proposing collaborative initiatives to enhance connectivity, thereby driving economic development, especially in Sri Lanka’s northern and north-central provinces.

Expected outcomes of the roundtable include actionable recommendations for policymakers in both countries, a joint action plan with specific measures and timelines, proposals for public-private partnerships in infrastructure projects, and a framework for ongoing dialogue and knowledge sharing.  By investing in improved physical connectivity, India and Sri Lanka can strengthen their partnership and contribute to a more vibrant and interconnected South Asia.  This roundtable represents a significant step towards realising this shared vision.

Those interested in participating in the event that will be held from 10 a.m. to 12:30 p.m. on 19 July may contact Hiruni Ariyarathna ([email protected]) for further details and the webinar link.