‘Club Wasantha’ was in debt at time of death; ‘didn’t have a cent’ – Tiran

Minister of Public Security Tiran Alles says that all but two suspects involved in the recent shooting and killing of popular businessman Surendra Wasantha Perera alias “Club Wasantha” in Athurugiriya have been arrested by the police.

“The Athurugiriya incident. I can’t go into much detail. We have arrested most of the suspects that need to be taken into custody. I think there’s only two more left (to be arrested).”

“Everyone else who was connected, who had planned or was involved in the operation ‘stage-by-stage’ have already been arrested,” he told reporters at a press briefing at the ministry today (18).

The Minister said that arrests have also been made in connection with the other recent shooting incidents in the country.

“On the Embilipitiya shooting, everyone has been arrested including the motorcycle rider and the shooter. On the Ambalangoda shooting, as of yesterday, that too we have already made arrests,” he said.

Dhammika Niroshana, also known as ‘Jonty,’ a former captain of Sri Lanka’s Under-19 cricket team, was shot dead in front of his residence in Ambalangoda on Tuesday (16) night.

“Therefore, these incidents happen. We have issues with regard to preventing the incidents from happening. There are firearms everywhere,” the police minister said today.

He stated that they have repeatedly requested the public to provide them with any information regarding firearms, but that such information is rarely provided.

Minister Alles urged the public to come forward with any information regarding illegal firearms without any fears or doubts.

“I will say this today. What I have to say even to mothers and fathers is that if you see any (weapons) in the hands of your children or if you come to find out that they are in possession of a weapon, please inform us before your child becomes a criminal.”

“If anyone knows about any locations where there are weapons, please let us know.”

The minister said Sri Lanka Police had announced rewards for such information on two occasions, but such information is rarely received.

“However, unfortunately in this country, the firearms that have entered into the country from time to time as well as the firearms that came out after the war against the LTTE, are everywhere. So, when there are so many firearms everywhere, it is not very difficult for someone to just take one of those and go shoot someone.”

The Minister of Public Security, however, pointed out that none of the recent shooting incident have been left unsolved and that arrests have been made with regard to every case despite a few fleeing the country.

“However, every one of these, as of this day none of these shootings have been left unsolved. In each and every one of those incidents, we have arrested every individual that need to be arrested.”

“One or two have fled the country after carrying out the shooting. We have made plans to bring back those who have fled the country. When we started this operation, I said that those who are hiding overseas will be brought back,” he declared.

Responding to a question regarding Wasantha’s wealth and assets, he said:

“As far as I know…. we can’t say 100%, but as far as we know he continuously ran clubs. At that time, he had that money. But according to the information we have now, at the time of his death he had been indebted around the country and was a person without a cent in his hand. That is the information that has come out after our investigations.”