INFRACON 2026 to drive future of infrastructure and construction development in Sri Lanka

The Infrastructure and Construction Exhibition (INFRACON 2026), a premier industry event dedicated to the nation’s infrastructure and construction sectors, will take place from 3 to 5 July at the Sirimavo Bandaranaike Memorial Exhibition Centre (SBMEC), Colombo.

Organised by Lanka Exhibitions and Conference Services Ltd., (Winner of multiple presidential awards in the MICE category and inductee into the MICE Hall of Fame) and Savor International Ltd., from Bangladesh, who is also an industry leader in the MICE sector in Bangladesh.

INFRACON 2026 will bring together industry leaders, policymakers, developers, contractors, engineers, architects, and technology providers. The event will feature organisations and suppliers from 5 major sectors - HVAC-R and Cold Chain, Power and Energy, Green Grid, Safe Water, and Build Materials. These major sectors will be showcased within the exhibition as individual concurrent segments. INFRACON 2026 will serve as a catalyst for growth and collaboration in Sri Lanka’s rapidly evolving infrastructure landscape, with participation from leading local and international exhibitors, shaping the future of infrastructure development in Sri Lanka and the South Asian region.

With strong participation expected from government institutions, private sector organisations, international brands, and trade delegations, INFRACON 2026 aims to foster collaboration across sectors and position Sri Lanka as a regional hub for infrastructure development. With 200 expected exhibitors and over 5,000 trade visitors, the exhibition reaffirms its position as one of Sri Lanka’s most significant platforms for the infrastructure and construction industries.

As Sri Lanka positions itself as a regional hub for development and investment, INFRACON 2026 will play a pivotal role in showcasing opportunities and promoting collaboration to create a more connected and sustainable future.

This three-day event aims to serve as a platform that showcases the latest innovations, products, services, and technologies related to infrastructure development, construction materials, heavy machinery, power and energy, smart buildings, urban development, and engineering solutions.

INFRACON 2026 is more than an exhibition, it is a knowledge sharing and networking platform that supports  Sri Lanka’s vision for resilient, sustainable and future-ready infrastructure. Visitors will have the chance to engage with exhibitors through live demonstrations, product launches, and interactive displays showcasing modern, sustainable construction solutions.

Lanka Exhibition and Conference Services, a leading trade exhibition organiser have tied up with Bangladesh’s premier exhibition management company Savor International to team up and bring this event to Sri Lanka. The event is supported by the Solar Industries Association (SIA) and ASHRAE Sri Lanka Chapter, which is the body for the heating, ventilation, AC and refrigeration sector in Sri Lanka.