Best Western Elyon Colombo affirms growing potential of Indian tourists visiting Sri Lanka

Best Western Elyon Colombo, Sri Lanka’s first-ever Best Western Hotel, celebrated its 10th anniversary recently marking a decade of exceptional service, resilience, and unwavering commitment to the future of Sri Lanka’s tourism industry.

Best Western Elyon Colombo is part of the globally acclaimed Best Western Hotels, the 5th largest hotel chain in the world that boasts approximately 4,300 hotels in over 100 countries and territories worldwide.

To mark the important event, the Hotel hosted a series of special events, promotions, and packages including a celebratory evening.

Commenting on the achievement, Presantha Jayamaha, Managing Director, Best Western Elyon Hotel said “Our journey has been marked by resilience and untiring commitment. During this decade , we have scaled many milestones and also overcome numerous challenges; emerging stronger each time, thanks to our dedicated team, business partners and loyal guests. Today, we celebrate these relationships that have made this journey possible”.

Jayamaha further stated, “We are excited about Sri Lanka’s potential as a world-class destination and our new project under development in Tangalle reflects our confidence in the industry’ potential and invite all stakeholders to join us in continuing to showcase the best of Sri Lanka to the world.”

The Hotel’s steadfast commitment to excellence is evident in the frequent accolades & awards, including multiple TripAdvisor Certificates of Excellence, which highlight its high standards and exceptional guest satisfaction including authentic hospitality.

Ajith Gurugalla, General Manager, of the Hotel, stated, “Through service and guest experience innovation, we aim to set new standards and position Colombo as a must-visit destination within Sri Lanka. Our pledge is to provide excellent hospitality and be a benchmark in Sri Lanka’s tourism industry.”

As Best Western Elyon Colombo’s extraordinary journey continues, visitors are invited to experience the exceptional hospitality that has defined the Hotel over the past decade.

Best Western Elyon Colombo has 60 tastefully designed contemporary rooms, a range of modern facilities, including a stunning rooftop bar.

Jayamaha notably said that India and other SAARC countries are strong source markets for Best Western as it is for many other hotels in the country, adding that Indian market accounts for 30% of its business volume with average stays of two-three days.

He said that the scrapping of the minimum room rate was a good decision as free market dynamics are now at play.

For more information about Best Western Elyon Colombo visit www.bestwesterncolombo.com   or contact +94 117 527 527

Govt urged to mobilise the economic power of women for betterment of Sri Lanka

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.