Roger Menezes in the scene …raising awareness

Graham Thorpe, the former England cricketer’s death, by suicide, came as a shock to many.

The world over, people are now beginning to realise that mental illness is a real disease and can affect anyone.

Various organisations have now stepped in to raise awareness about this mental health condition that affects mood, thinking and behaviour.

In Australia, the Bellbirds Club Inc. is doing it with ‘A Spring Gala’ with the aim of raising awareness for Mental Illness and Suicide Prevention.

This event will be held on Saturday, 7th September, at the Epping Club, in Sydney, Australia, and will feature several artistes, based in Australia, including Roger Menezes, Clifford Willenberg, Nihara Loos, Darrell De Silva, Gary Pietersz, Maryanne Graham, Michael Northwood and Reece Davis.

Roger Menezes, who is in Sri Lanka at the moment and performed at the Galadari Hotel, from May, this year, is very much active in Sydney.

He says he still performs in Sydney, as a solo artiste, duo, or in a band situation.

“I’m doing a big one on 7th September, for charity – a black tie event. I do private parties, anniversaries, birthdays, engagements, christenings – the whole spectrum. If there is music, I’m there.”

Roger also mentioned that he does about 15 aged care retirement homes during the week – four days in the week, one hour concerts (mornings and afternoons).

“The old folks love the saxophone songs. It brings tears to their eyes…beautiful memories for them! I play guitar and sing, too, a whole different play list – the old time songs – and they all sing along, too. At times you feel sad, as well. So my music is a therapy for them. Music is my Life. I grew up with music all around me.”

Roger added that he is grateful to his father, Miki Menezes, for the good grounding he got from him, in music, discipline and professionalism…and presentation.

The versatile artiste is scheduled to leave for Sydney this week after his long stay at the Galadari.

“I love performing at the Galadari. It has that homely feeling – everybody is so friendly and accommodating.”

During his stint at the Galadari, Roger did build up a fan base and was invited several times, by fans, to visit their homes and partake in their home-cooked meals.

“I also need to say that the hotel’s GM Sampath Siriwardena is truly a down-to-earth and a very humble GM, and it was a pleasure working with him.”

Roger indicated that he would be back, in Colombo, again, in September, and might get involved in a few gigs for the Oak Ray Hotel chain.

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.