Home Lands launches 4 new resort apartment projects featuring 1,000 units

Holds “Property Investment Roadshow 2026 – Road to your next investment”

Home Lands Property Investment Roadshow 2026 brought together investors, homeowners, and industry stakeholders for a full-day showcase to witness the historic launch of Greater Colombo’s four brand-new mega resort apartment projects, comprising 1,000 resort apartments. Held on 8 February at the Grand Ballroom of Hilton Colombo, the event marked one of the largest residential launches ever by a single developer in Sri Lanka.

Home Lands Group of Companies Chairman Nalin Herath said: “As Sri Lanka’s number one and most trusted innovative developer, Home Lands is proud to be the only real estate developer to win ‘Best Developer – Sri Lanka’ at the PropertyGuru Asia Property Awards for three consecutive years, and the only real estate brand to be recognised with Superbrands status in 2025. These honors inspire us to continue setting new benchmarks, making luxury living accessible and affordable, and delivering exceptional value to our customers.”

He added: “With property demand on the rise and strong capital appreciation, there has never been a better time to invest. With an array of projects to choose from, I warmly invite everyone to explore these opportunities and invest with us today.”

The highlight of the event was the grand reveal of four brand-new resort apartment projects: NOVA Resort Apartments - Rajagiriya, Serene Heights Resort Apartments - Thalawathugoda,

Fedora Resort Apartments - Athurugiriya and Canterbury Crest Resort Apartments at Canterbury Golf City - Piliyandala–Kahathuduwa.

The reveal was followed by an insightful presentation detailing the unique lifestyles, designs, locations, and investment potential, along with easy and flexible payment plans, presented by Home Lands Group Head of Business Development and Marketing Operations Ashinsanie Weerasinghe.

The event offered customers an unmatched level of choice, both in lifestyle and affordability. Reflecting this philosophy, the Home Lands promise “Your Choice, Your Price” resonated strongly throughout the day, empowering customers to select homes and investments that best suited their aspirations and budgets.

Adding further excitement, Home Lands unveiled its major promotional campaign for 2026: “Home Lands Mercedes-Benz Draw 2026 - Choose Your Lifestyle, Drive Your Dream.” All customers who purchase a unit between 1 January 2026 and 31 December 2026 stand a chance to win a C-Class Mercedes-Benz, reinforcing Home Lands’ commitment to rewarding customer trust.

Beyond the project launches, the event also celebrated a significant milestone with the Key Handing Over Ceremony for Greendale Retirement Leisure Village and Cressida Resort Apartments, Athurugiriya where the first set of keys were ceremoniously handed over to residents. This moment symbolised Home Lands’ dedication to delivering on promises and timelines, strengthening the trust placed in the brand by its customers.

In addition to the newly launched projects, attendees had the opportunity to explore other prestigious developments by Home Lands, including Pentara Residencies - Thummulla Handiya, Oceana Resort Apartments and Villas - Wadduwa, Bayfonte Marina - Negombo, and Waterdale - Colombo 07. Customers also experienced Home Lands’ exclusive VR walkthrough technology, allowing them to virtually explore resort apartment units in immersive detail.

The Home Lands Property Investment Roadshow 2026 offered a rare, all-in-one property investment experience, further strengthened by the Home Lands Wealth Builder Payment Plan, supported by five leading partner banks - Commercial Bank, HNB, Sampath Bank, NDB, and DFCC. Representatives from each bank were present throughout the day, providing personalised financial consultations, flexible payment solutions, and up to 100% funding options, empowering customers to confidently plan their investment journey.

Reflecting on this extra ordinary success Home Lands said it will continue to redefine landscapes and lifestyles with trust, innovation and excellence.