New ‘ice’ Chemical Stock Found in Tangalle

Another large stock of chemicals suspected to be used in the production of crystal methamphetamine (commonly known as ‘ice’) was discovered last morning (7) in Netolpitiya, Tangalle, intensifying the ongoing crackdown on synthetic drug operations.

Acting on information from area residents, Tangalle Police conducted a special raid on a property near Welivenna Cross Road, where a quantity of white chemical substances was recovered.

Police said the chemicals closely resemble those found during a raid in Thalawa, Middeniya, which led to the arrest of former Angunukolapelessa Pradeshiya Sabha member Piyal Manamperi. Investigators believe the chemicals may have been stored at the location about four months ago.

The newly seized stock has been taken to the Tangalle Police for further examination, while forensic tests are expected to confirm whether the substances are precursors used in large-scale ‘ice’ production.

Meanwhile, the Walasmulla Magistrate’s Court on the same day (7) issued a seven-day detention order allowing the Police to interrogate Piyal Manamperi, who was arrested on 6 September in connection with the Middeniya discovery. The raid in Thalawa uncovered nearly 50,000 kg of chemicals buried at a private residence — one of the largest seizures of its kind in Sri Lanka.

Investigations have revealed that Piyal and his brother Sampath were allegedly involved in concealing the chemicals and are close associates of notorious organised crime figure ‘Kehelbaddara Padme’, who was recently arrested in Jakarta, Indonesia. During questioning, another suspect, known as ‘Backhoe Saman’, reportedly confessed that Padme had arranged the import of the chemical stock into Sri Lanka.

In a related development, the Sri Lanka Podujana Peramuna (SLPP) on Saturday (6) announced the suspension of Sampath Manamperi’s (borther of Piyal Manamperi) party membership pending the outcome of investigations. “This is a grave allegation. We expect investigations to be completed quickly and the truth revealed to the public,” SLPP General Secretary Sagara Kariyawasam said in a statement.

Further, Police Spokesman, ASP F.U. Wootler, clarified that there is no link between the two containers found in Middeniya connected to the ongoing drug investigation and the 323 containers recently released from the port, which had raised public concern.

He said that the container numbers in the drug-related case do not match those of the 323 containers in question.

Police have launched an extensive investigation to track down other suspects connected to the chemical stockpile and the suspected drug network.