Athapaththu, Harshitha lead Sri Lanka’s big ICC rankings surge

AUG.04 (Mirror Sports) - Sri Lanka's white-ball success against Pakistan has been rewarded with major gains in the latest ICC rankings, with captain Chamari Athapaththu and Harshitha Samarawickrama leading a wave of career-best rises.

Sri Lanka's women's team received a major boost in the latest ICC rankings following its successful white-ball series against Pakistan, with several players reaching career-best positions.

Captain Chamari Athapaththu climbed one place to a career-high No. 6 in the ICC Women's T20I Batting Rankings after scores of 39 and 40 helped guide Sri Lanka to a 2-0 series victory over Pakistan.

Young batter Imesha Dulani made the biggest leap for Sri Lanka after smashing an unbeaten 101 in the opening T20I. Her maiden T20I century lifted her 33 places to a career-best No. 23.

Pakistan also celebrated notable gains in the T20I batting rankings. Muneeba Ali climbed four places to No. 30, while Shawaal Zulfiqar surged from outside the top 100 to No. 52 after scores of 63 and 48 in the opening two matches.

Sri Lanka's success was also reflected in the updated ODI rankings after clinching the three-match series 2-1 against Pakistan.

Player of the Series, Harshitha Samarawickrama, who scored 173 runs across the series, including an unbeaten 73 in the decider, climbed four places to a career-best No. 13 in the ICC Women's ODI Batting Rankings.

Fellow Sri Lankan Hasini Perera also climbed two places to No. 35, while Pakistan's Gull Feroza rose nine spots to No. 45 and captain Fatima Sana moved up six places to No. 56.

In the ODI bowling rankings, Pakistan spinner Nashra Sandhu advanced three places to No. 10 after claiming four wickets in the series. Sri Lanka all-rounders Chamari Athapaththu and Kavisha Dilhari also improved their positions, climbing to No. 31 and No. 33, respectively.

Australia opener Beth Mooney continues to hold the No. 1 spot in the ICC Women's T20I Batting Rankings.