Pepsi® unveils its new logo with street art murals in Sri Lanka

Honouring its 125 years long legacy, Pepsi®, a brand that has been at the center of global pop culture, unveiled its new identity in Sri Lanka through its groundbreaking campaign, ‘Pepsi® Street Kala’. The ‘Pepsi® Street Kala’ campaign represents a groundbreaking moment for the brand, introducing its revamped brand identity through public art for the first time globally. With 17 murals featured across the country, this initiative is an attempt to democratize art through dynamic experiences that invite public interaction and make art and culture more accessible.

Pepsi® celebrated this milestone with a spectacular launch event at the iconic Lotus Tower – South Asia’s tallest self-supported tower. The event brought its bold identity to life through immersive experiences, captivating the audience from start to finish. Media, influencers and individuals from the art community in Sri Lanka enjoyed a sensory feast, with the aura of Pepsi® resonating throughout, showcasing the brand’s vibrant spirit. The highlight of the evening was the illumination of the Lotus Tower in Colombo with Pepsi®’s new bold colors, transforming the city’s skyline.

Speaking on the launch, Anuj Goyal, Associate Director, Area-Countries Region, PepsiCo said, “Pepsi has consistently been at the forefront of youth culture and with this initiative, we are extending that dedication to the streets of Sri Lanka. The new Pepsi logo represents a bold new chapter for Pepsi, bringing it to life through street art with the ‘Pepsi® Street Kala’ campaign – enabling us to expand the horizons of visual narrative. The grand launch event, including the striking projection of our brand colors at the iconic Lotus Tower and the murals altogether, are a celebration of youth, creativity, and the spirit of Pepsi.”

Also commenting on the launch, Sandeep Kumar, Country Head at Varun Beverages Limited (VBL) – Sri Lanka also added, “We are excited to bring the ‘Pepsi® Street Kala’ campaign to life in Sri Lanka, showcasing the refreshed brand identity of Pepsi. This campaign and today’s event celebrates creativity, culture, and the unbreakable bond Pepsi shares with the people of Sri Lanka. We’re proud to be part of this milestone that reflects the vibrant energy of the Pepsi consumers, while integrating public art experiences in their routine commute.”

Rotary fights breast cancer with NCCP through early detection and prevention

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.