Ceylon Chamber to organise Sri Lanka Climate Summit 2024

Under theme ‘Code Red: Climate Risks and Opportunities for Sri Lankan Businesses’

The Ceylon Chamber of Commerce is proud to announce the inaugural Sri Lanka Climate Summit 2024, themed “Code Red: Climate Risks and Opportunities for Sri Lankan Businesses” from 7 to 9 May at the Shangri La Hotel, Colombo.

As Sri Lanka stands at a critical juncture with scientific consensus warning of the potentially devastating consequences of accelerating climate change, the three-day summit will explore the dual reality of climate risks and opportunities. The climate summit will delve into the specific climate threats Sri Lanka faces, highlighting the potential disruptions to key economic sectors. It will also explore the transformative power of climate action for Sri Lankan businesses. By embracing sustainable practices and innovative solutions, Sri Lankan companies can not only mitigate risks but also unlock green growth opportunities. The event will bring together all stakeholders to create a dialogue that will contribute to developing a climate action plan. This plan is envisaged to drive green growth and climate action in terms of adaptation and mitigation of climate risks.

Over three days the Summit will draw on the insights of renowned national and international experts in the fields of public and climate policy, academics, industry veterans and leading personalities in the climate action charge, to explore climate risks, opportunities, and the facilitation required to mitigate risks and successfully leverage growth opportunities.

Sessions will cover a gamut of topics ranging from understanding the climate crisis, risks to business, integrating climate action into business strategy, and decarbonisation, to addressing climate action policies and exploring industry-specific strategies to facilitate Sri Lanka’s journey towards being a sustainability centre of excellence.

The Summit will close with a presentation on key insights and takeaways, followed by a discussion on commitments and next steps for Sri Lanka’s green economic transition.

For inquiries and registration, please contact Niroshini on 0115588852/[email protected] or Nimali on 0115588892/[email protected], or visit https://event.chamber.lk/