Lower tea offerings spur stronger bidding at Colombo auction

The auction offerings declined to 6.0 million kilogrammes (M/Kgs), from 6.2 M/Kgs on offer the previous week.

There was improved activity, perhaps due to a combination of the declining auction offerings in the forthcoming sales and a gradual improvement in product quality.

The Ex-Estate offerings were fairly similar to last and totalled 0.94 M/Kgs. The overall quality was mostly similar to last.

Selectively, the teas from the Western slopes appreciated by Rs.20-40 per kilogramme. The Nuwara Eliyas were somewhat a disappointing feature, with limited activity.

The Uda Pussellawas witnessed some recovery, consequent to improved activity at the lower end of the market.

The Uvas, here again, the teas in the higher price bracket, were easier, whilst the improved activity at the lower end resulted in the bottom end of the market gaining by Rs.20-40 per kilogramme.

The High and Medium Grown CTC teas were more sellable around the previous week’s levels, whilst the corresponding Low Grown types sold well at firm to dearer rates. Limited activity was seen from the shippers to the UK, continent and South Africa. Selective buying was seen from Japan and China, whilst the shippers to the Middle East and CIS bid on a wider cross-section of teas.

The Low Growns totalled approximately 2.4 M/Kgs, with all categories witnessing a fair demand.

In the Leafy and Semi-Leafy catalogues, the high-priced BOP1s were easier, whilst the balance sold around last levels.

The OP1s, in general, were firm to dearer. The well-made OPs appreciated, whilst the balance together with the OPAs was firm.

The high-priced PEKs together with the Best and Below Best PEK1s appreciated, whilst the balance sold at last levels.

In the Tippy catalogue, the FBOPs in general appreciated. The Select Best FF1s gained, whilst the balance in general was firm to dearer, following quality.

In the Premium catalogue, the high-priced Tippy teas sold around last levels, whilst the Best and Below Best together with the cleaner teas at the bottom appreciated. The balance was irregular, following quality. The leafier varieties gained in value.