SL seeks Japan backing for National AI Data Centre, digital TV push

Two counties identify AI and digital transformation as priority areas for expanded cooperation

Govt. sees National AI Data Centre as infrastructure to support development and deployment of AI capabilities in Sri Lanka

Sri Lanka is seeking deeper Japanese support to establish a National AI Data Centre and accelerate its long-delayed transition to digital television, as the government moves to build the domestic infrastructure needed for its broader digital economy ambitions.

The proposals were discussed yesterday between Digital Economy Deputy Minister Eranga Weeraratne and a delegation led by Japan International Cooperation Agency (JICA) Senior Vice President Hara Pohei, with the two sides identifying artificial intelligence (AI) and digital transformation as priority areas for expanded cooperation. A key focus was the proposed National AI Data Centre, which the government sees as infrastructure to support the development and deployment of AI capabilities in Sri Lanka.

Discussions covered capacity-building and training programmes, development of AI solutions tailored to the local requirements and access to international technical expertise and best practices.

The initiative comes as Sri Lanka seeks to build the computing, data and skills infrastructure necessary to expand the use of AI across the government and wider economy, while reducing dependence on the overseas capabilities. The two sides also discussed accelerating Sri Lanka’s digital television project, with Weeraratne calling for outstanding practical issues to be resolved to speed up implementation. The government also raised the possibility of manufacturing digital television set-top boxes locally, instead of relying entirely on imports. Set-top boxes are required for households with compatible analogue television sets to receive digital television signals.

Local production could create a domestic supply opportunity as the country transitions to digital broadcasting, while reducing the foreign exchange requirement associated with importing the equipment.

Japan has been a key development partner in Sri Lanka’s shift towards digital terrestrial television, with the country adopting Japan’s Integrated Services Digital Broadcasting-Terrestrial or ISDB-T, standard.

The latest discussions signal an effort to broaden that technology partnership beyond broadcasting into AI infrastructure and digital public services as Sri Lanka steps up implementation of its digital economy agenda.

The meeting was also attended by Digital Economy Ministry Secretary Waruna Sri Dhanapala, Senior Presidential Adviser on Digital Economy and GovTech Chairman Dr. Hans Wijayasuriya and JICA Sri Lanka Chief Representative Shigeki Honsu.

The Digital Economy Ministry said it appreciated the JICA’s technical cooperation and that the government would work to advance the proposed initiatives while strengthening Sri Lanka-Japan cooperation.