COYLE, JETRO kick-off Sri Lankan Corporate Health and Productivity Awards 2025

From left: COYLEPast Chairman and Head of the SLCHP Judging Panel Dr. Rohitha Silva, COYLE Chairman Manjula Wijesundera, JETRO Colombo Resident Representative Hiroki Oi and COYLE Event Chair, Mihiru Perera at the press conference – Pic by Upul Abayasekara

The Chamber of Young Lankan Entrepreneurs (COYLE), in partnership with the Japan External Trade Organisation (JETRO), officially launched the Sri Lankan Corporate Health and Productivity Awards (SLCHPA) 2025 at Shangri-La Colombo recently.

Now in its third year, the SLCHPA recognises businesses that champion employee wellbeing, workplace sustainability and productivity excellence. This year’s edition marks a milestone with JETRO joining as a strategic partner, introducing international benchmarking, expertise and global best practices.

COYLE Chairman Manjula Wijesundera said: “The Corporate Health and Productivity Awards is more than just a recognition program – it is a movement to inspire all organisations to take proactive steps towards better workplace health and holistic productivity. A balanced lifestyle leads to a happy family life.”

Wijesundera emphasised that there will be twelve awards this year, with three dedicated to smaller corporate sectors and the remainder recognising medium, large and extra-large companies. Past winners have included leading names such as Ceylon Biscuits Ltd., and Hemas.

JETRO Colombo Resident Representative Hiroki Oi said the partnership with COYLE aims to promote a healthy work–life balance, building on the three-year memorandum of understanding (MoU) signed between us to improve work styles and foster a healthier economy.

The awards align with COYLE’s mission to foster a better employment environment in Sri Lanka, ensuring people remain at the heart of business growth strategies.

COYLE Past Chairman and SLCHPA Judging Panel Head Dr. Rohitha Silva, said it was a great privilege to serve on the panel, noting that the awards aim to encourage healthier workplace environments in today’s highly competitive corporate world. He added that the panel also includes Social Health Strategy Research Institute, Japan Representative Director of General Incorporated Association Kenichiro Asano, whose expertise will bring significant benefits to Sri Lanka’s corporate sector.

COYLE Event Chair Mihiru Perera urged corporate leaders to “step up and show the way” by being recognised not just for products or services, but for how they treat their people—setting an example for businesses nationwide.

“This initiative marks the beginning of stronger work ethics in the corporate sector and encourages government institutions to also embrace practices that promote a healthy work–life balance,” Perera added.

Participation offers tangible benefits, including enhanced employer branding, improved employee engagement and national recognition, with winners also featured as case studies in health and productivity excellence.

Sampath Bank, the Principal Sponsor for 2025, reaffirmed its commitment to building a thriving workforce as the foundation for a stronger economy, expressing pride in supporting organisations that lead in promoting health, wellbeing, and productivity.

COYLE and JETRO also launched the official event website, www.slchpa.com, providing corporate sectors with guidance on how to participate in the upcoming awards, which will be held in February next year.

Applications are now open and can be downloaded from www.slchpa.com, with submissions closing on 31 October.