Ambassador of Sri Lanka to France presents Credentials to Co-Prince of Andorra Emmanuel Macron

Principality of Andorra Co-Prince Emmanuel Macron (left) and Sri Lankan Ambassador-designate to France Manisha Gunasekera

The Ambassador of Sri Lanka to France Manisha Gunasekera presented her Letters of Credence to the Co-Prince of the Principality of Andorra Emmanuel Macron at the Elysee Palace on Tuesday 17 September 2024.

Following the presentation of Credentials, Ambassador Gunasekera had a brief meeting with the Co-Prince in which she conveyed the warm greetings and best wishes of the President of Sri Lanka. She also apprised the Co-Prince of the vibrant nature of bilateral relations between Sri Lanka and Andorra, and on cooperation in multilateral fora.

Co-Prince Macron extended his warm greetings to the President, the Government, and the people of Sri Lanka, and looked forward to further strengthening existing cooperation between Sri Lanka and France across sectors.

In his address to the Ambassadors presenting Credentials, the Co-Prince recalled the special role of the President of the French Republic as “the guardian of a tradition and a long history” that united over centuries the Principality of Andorra lying in the heart of the Pyrannes with France. The Co-Prince appreciated the cooperation and friendly ties that the countries present, including Sri Lanka, maintained with Andorra, which helped forge further political, economic, commercial, and cultural ties with the Principality. The Co-Prince also referred to Andorra’s strengthening partnership with the European Union. Andorra Foreign Affairs Minister Imma Tor Faus was also present at the Credentials ceremony.

Previously, on 15 March, as part of the Credentials process, Ambassador Gunasekera presented her Letters of Credence to Principality of Andorra Co-Prince and Bishop of Urgell Joan-Enric Vives i Sicília at the Episcopal Palace in La Seu d’Urgell.

During her visit to Andorra, the Ambassador had a meeting with Andorra Foreign Affairs Minister Imma Tor Faus, where discussions focussed on bilateral relations between Sri Lanka and Andorra and on areas of shared interest. During the visit, the Ambassador also attended the Reception hosted by Andorra Parliament President Vicenç Mateu Zamora to celebrate the 31st anniversary of the Constitution Day of Andorra on 14 March 2024. At the Reception, the Ambassador exchanged greetings with Andorra Prime Minister Xavier Espot Zamora.

The Principality of Andorra has a unique diarchical arrangement where the Bishop of Urgell and the President of France serve as Andorra’s co-princes, following tradition. Ambassador Gunasekera is currently Sri Lanka’s resident Ambassador to France, with concurrent accreditation to the Principality of Andorra.