Thailand–Sri Lanka Business Forum charts new pathways for trade, investment and regional growth

The Business Forum on ‘Trade, Investment and Beyond’, organized by the Royal Thai Embassy together with the Sri Lanka–Thailand Business Council and the Sri Lanka–Greater Mekong Business Council, highlighted the opportunities created by the newly enacted Sri Lanka–Thailand Free Trade Agreement (SLTFTA).

The forum, which brought together business leaders, diplomats, and government officials from both countries, focused on strengthening supply chains, attracting investment, expanding trade, and enhancing economic cooperation.

Bilateral trade reached US$ 649 million in 2025, up 48 percent from the previous year, according to Paitoon Mahapannaporn, Ambassador of the Kingdom of Thailand. While Hayleys Group leads Sri Lankan investments in Thailand, he highlighted important Thai investments in Sri Lanka, such as INSEE Cement and CP Group ventures.

Rizan Nazeer, President of the Sri Lanka-Thailand Business Council emphasized the significance of building strong cross-border partnerships and utilizing Sri Lanka’s highly skilled workforce and Thailand’s industrial strengths to establish competitive regional value chains.

Secretary to the Ministry of Trade, Commerce, Food Security and Co-operative Development, K.A. Vimalenthirarajah discussed the advantages of the SLTFTA, stating that it would improve market access, strengthen economic partnerships, and create opportunities in sectors like food processing, logistics, information technology, research and development, and technology-driven investments.

To help facilitate trade, Chamila Prasantha Bopage, Senior Deputy Director of Customs, Compliance and Facilitation Directorate, Sri Lanka Customs presented key regulatory requirements and highlighted the significance of accurate product classification and effective customs procedures.

Dr. Visit Limlurcha, President of the Thai Future Food Trade Association and Vice Chairman of the Thai Chamber of Commerce and Board of Trade of Thailand identified opportunities in food and agriculture, healthcare, information technology, electronics, machinery, construction, tourism, hospitality, logistics, textiles, furniture, and household products, describing Sri Lanka as a strategic gateway to South Asia and the Middle East from a Thai business perspective.

Meanwhile, Dr. Phusit Wonglorsaichon, Deputy Dean of Graduate School of the University of the Thai Chamber of Commerce, emphasized the importance of digitalization, innovation, technology adoption, research and development, and efficient use of free trade agreements (FTAs) in fostering competitiveness and future business expansion.

Sri Lanka’s strategic position, investor-friendly regulations, and expanding role as a center for advanced manufacturing and maritime logistics were all highlighted by Board of Investment Director General of the Board of Investment (BOI) of Sri Lanka, Renuka Weerakone in her presentation of the country as an appealing foreign direct investment destination.

The forum concluded with a shared commitment to maximizing the benefits of the SLTFTA, strengthening bilateral trade and investment, and building a broader economic partnership based on innovation, connectivity, and sustainable growth.