Janashakthi Life introduces Grand Legacy plan

Janashakthi Life has launched Janashakthi Life Grand Legacy, a new proposition that reimagines life insurance as a way for grandparents to plan not only for themselves but for the generations that follow.

Moving beyond the traditional purpose of life insurance as protection against life’s uncertainties, Grand Legacy transforms the idea of leaving something behind into the ability to build security and opportunities for the years ahead. The proposition enables the grandparents to create financial support that could contribute towards their grandchildren’s education, career aspirations and future goals.

For the grandparents, the desire to give their grandchildren the best future possible comes naturally. Grand Legacy validates this desire from a financial perspective and offers the grandparents the means to create real value for their nearest and dearest.

The proposition builds on Janashakthi Life’s pioneering approach to enabling individuals to obtain life insurance coverage up to the age of 80. With Grand Legacy, this capability takes on a broader purpose, recognising that financial planning later in life can extend beyond personal protection to creating opportunities for future generations, including the third generation.

Grand Legacy offers flexible short to medium-term investment options designed to respond to the evolving family needs, while extending access to life insurance protection at a later stage of life.

This allows the grandparents to take a more purposeful approach to financial planning, with the flexibility to consider both their own needs and the future they want to help create for their grandchildren.

Janashakthi Life Director and CEO Ravi Liyanage said, “Janashakthi Life has always focused on redefining innovative life insurance solutions around the evolving needs of our customers. Grand Legacy is a natural extension of this approach, transforming a grandparent’s aspirations for their grandchildren into a meaningful financial plan for their future. It reflects our commitment to looking beyond traditional insurance needs and creating solutions that address the aspirations of families across generations, helping the customers plan with greater purpose and confidence. This enables the legacy built by grandparents in their lifetime to be meaningfully passed on to generations to come.”