Adani Group may run three Sri Lankan airports – Indian media

Indian media has reported that Sri Lanka’s minister for tourism,  sports, and youth affairs, Harin Fernando, who is attending the OTM travel show in Mumbai,  said that the Adani Group is negotiating with Sri Lankan authorities to manage three airports in the island nation, including its premier international gateway, Bandarnaike International Airport in Colombo.

Other airports being offered are Ratmalana Airport in Colombo and Mattala Airport, the latter earning the tag of the world’s emptiest international airport seven years ago He is reported to have said that modalities were being discussed between the two sides and could involve management contracts as well.

“There are plans to work with Adani Group for the management of airports,” Fernando had told businessline.

The plan to rope in a private partner to manage airports comes amid a resurgence in tourism. Foreign tourist arrivals in Sri Lanka doubled to 1.48 million in 2023 on a year-on-year basis. This, however, has put a strain on the country’s airport infrastructure. It is hoped that a private partner would help in expanding the facilities and improving the passenger experience.

Related Topics:Adani GroupBandarnayake International AirportHarin FernandoMattala Mahinda Rajapaksa Intenational AirportRatmalana airport

President Ranil Wickremesinghe visits Sri Lankan Consulate in Western Australia

Targets for 2024 are 2.2million tourists and US$ 4billion in revenue – Minister of Tourism

Airport and airline industry achieved a  profit of Rs. 26 billion this year – Minister Nimal Siripala de Silva

Government expected to give green light to new cricket constitution

Harin Fernando sworn in as Minister of Sports and Youth Affairs, Pavithra Wanniarachchi as Minister of Irrigation after President relieves Roshan Ranasinghe of all portfolios

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.