Unilever Sri Lanka partners USAID and Vega Innovations to scale-up refillable systems

Image Caption: Representatives from Unilever, USAID, USAID Ocean Plastics Reduction Activity, Codegen/Vega Innovations, and the Environment Ministry

Unilever Sri Lanka, in partnership with Vega Innovations, and the United States Agency for International Development’s (USAID), is scaling up the use of refillable stations.

These stations, part of Vega Innovations’ UFill initiative, offer consumers cost-effective ways to refill Unilever products such as laundry liquids and shampoos, while reducing reliance on single-use plastic packaging.

By 2027, the UFill initiative is expected to prevent over 128 metric tons of plastic waste from entering Sri Lankan landfills. Consumers will also benefit from 20-30% lower cost by refilling instead of purchasing new packaging. USAID’s Ocean Plastics Reduction Activity will support these efforts through strategic and technical assistance.

The Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) formalising the partnership was signed at Vega Innovations’ headquarters – a significant milestone in efforts to reduce plastic waste across Sri Lanka. This builds on Unilever’s and Vega Innovations’ existing network of refill stations in locations such as the Colombo Fort Railway Station, Seva Vanitha Budget Centre and apartment complexes, with plans to scale up across the country. This localised initiative also aligns with Unilever’s broader efforts through the CIRCLE Alliance —Catalysing Inclusive, Resilient, and Circular Local Economies — a global public-private collaboration launched earlier this year by Unilever, USAID, and EY to address plastic waste and drive the development of circular economies. The Alliance is initially focused on India, Indonesia, Vietnam and the Philippines.

“Unilever’s ambition is to end plastic pollution through reduction, circulation and collaboration. As part of our global virgin plastic reduction targets, we are committed to finding innovative ways for consumers to shop and use our products - including refillable and reusable systems.” Said Unilever Sri Lanka Chairman and CEO Ali Tariq. “The partnership with USAID and Vega Innovations will help us deliver loved brands such as Dove, Lifebuoy, Sunsilk, Sunlight and Vim to Sri Lankan consumers in a more convenient, affordable, and sustainable manner.”

Vega Innovations CEO Dr. Harsha Subasinghe added: “Vega Innovations is proud to lead the charge in reducing plastic waste through innovative solutions like UFill. With USAID’s support, we can continue to expand our network and offer consumers an eco-friendly and convenient way to reduce their plastic footprint.”

“The United States supports partnerships like this because they demonstrate our commitment to reducing plastic waste by introducing practical, scalable solutions,” said USAID Sri Lanka Acting Deputy Mission Director Ann Bacon. “Through this partnership we are helping Sri Lanka make sustainable consumption a reality.”