President pledges swift relief to all eligible ‘Aswasuma’ beneficiaries

President Ranil Wickremesinghe has emphasized that swift relief would be provided to all eligible “Aswasuma” beneficiaries while stressing the importance of government officials’ support in effectively delivering the “Aswasuma” and “Urumaya” benefits to the people.

Furthermore, President Wickremesinghe commended all Grama Niladhari Officers for their unwavering commitment to supporting the government’s successful implementation of these two programs despite facing hardships.

Wickremesinghe also promised to consider their proposals and address their issues, the PMD mentioned.

He made these observations during a meeting at the Matale Wilgamuwa Divisional Secretariat on the “Aswasuma” program implementation today (29).

Meanwhile the President also made a visit to Wilgamuwa Pallegama Madhya Maha Vidyalaya today (Feb. 29), to assess the educational activities of the students.

The President’s visit coincided with his attendance at a discussion held at the Wilgamuwa Divisional Secretariat auditorium regarding the “Aswasuma” program, the President’s Media Division (PMD) reported.

However, on his way to the auditorium, President Wickremesinghe spotted students at the Pallegama Madhya Maha Vidyalaya stadium and took the opportunity to engage with them in a friendly conversation, inquiring about their educational pursuits, it added.

During his visit, President Wickremesinghe also conversed with the teachers at the school, discussing both the students’ academic endeavours and any identified shortcomings within the educational system. Drawing attention to some of the issues raised during his interaction, the President assured the students of his commitment to addressing them promptly.

Additionally, he offered his blessings for their future educational activities, encouraging them to strive for excellence.

Amidst his engagement with the students and school, President Wickremesinghe did not overlook the importance of involving parents and residents in discussions about the school’s welfare, the PMD said.