Singapore’s Jetstar Asia launches direct flights to Colombo

ECONOMYNEXT – Singapore carrier Jetstar Asia commenced scheduled flight operations between Sri Lanka and Singapore on Thursday (21) with five return flights each week, operated by their fleet of Airbus A320s, the local by Airport and Aviation Services said.

The inaugural flight arrived at the island nation’s Bandaranaike International Airport (BIA) with 179 passengers. The inaugural flight was ceremonially welcomed with a water salute by Airport and Aviation Services (Sri Lanka) (Private) Limited.

“The launch of Jetstar Asia’s scheduled flights between Singapore and Sri Lanka is a significant boost for our tourism sector’s ongoing growth,” Harsha Abeywickrema, Chairman of Airport and Aviation Services (Sri Lanka) (Private) Limited (AASL) and a retired Air Force chief said.

“This new connection promises an enhanced travel experience for both local and international passengers. We are delighted to see Jetstar Asia contributing to Sri Lanka’s aviation and tourism landscape by commencing flights to Bandaranaike International Airport.”

Jetstar Asia is one of the Asia Pacific’s largest low fares networks by revenue and its carriers operate more than 5,000 flights a week to more than 85 destinations, the Singapore company said in its website.

Jetstar Asia in Australia and New Zealand are wholly owned by the Qantas Group, while Jetstar Asia Airways, based in Singapore and managed by Newstar Holdings is majority-owned by Singapore company Westbrook Investments (51 percent), with the Qantas Group holding the remaining 49 percent.

Jetstar Japan, is a partnership between the Qantas Group, Japan Airlines and Tokyo Century Corporation.

Sri Lanka this year targeted 2.3 million tourists into the island nation with an ambitious revenue of $5 billion.

However, the island nation has seen only 1.62 million tourists in the first 10 months of the year with a 44 percent growth, while the revenue has recorded $2.53 billion in the same period with a 59 percent growth, the official data showed. (Colombo/November 22/2024)