Mojtaba seen for the 1st time since war: Israeli media claimed he is in ’critical condition’

Bhaskar English - Iran has released a video of Supreme Leader Mojtaba Khamenei. In the video, which is his first public appearance since the war, Khamenei is seen talking to people seated on the ground. The video has been released at a time when several reports have emerged about his health.

Iran’s semi-official news agency Mehr released the video. In the footage, Khamenei appears to be in normal health and is seen interacting with people.

Israeli media had recently claimed that Khamenei’s condition was critical and that he had been taken to a hospital. Following these reports, Iran released the video.

However, it has not been revealed when the video was recorded. The release of the footage by Iranian media is being seen as a response to the speculation surrounding Khamenei’s health.

Earlier on Friday, Israeli media reports claimed that Khamenei was in an “extremely critical condition”.

Channel 14, citing sources inside Iran, and an earlier report by The Jerusalem Post, quoting IranWire and sources close to Iranian President Masoud Pezeshkian’s administration, reported that concerns over his health were circulating within Iran’s leadership.

One source cited by The Jerusalem Post had claimed, “We would not be surprised if we heard news of his martyrdom soon.”

Khamenei assumed the position of Supreme Leader shortly after his father, Ayatollah Ali Khamenei, was assassinated in joint US-Israeli military strikes on February 28.

Since taking office, he has not made any public appearances and has communicated exclusively through written statements.

Reports indicate that he was injured and potentially disfigured in the initial strikes that targeted his father’s compound, forcing him into hiding.

He was reportedly compelled to communicate with senior regime figures through a slow network of intermediaries to avoid being targeted.

Adding to speculation over his status, President Masoud Pezeshkian acknowledged in a state TV interview that direct interaction with Khamenei is currently “very difficult”.

International and regional reports have repeatedly questioned his physical location and capacity. In July, Saudi news outlet Al Hadath, citing an Israeli security source, claimed that Khamenei was “not in Iran”.

Around the same time, US President Donald Trump said in a Fox News interview that Iran’s top military leadership had been eliminated, claiming that Khamenei was “90% gone” and incapacitated following the military campaign.

Iranian state officials have previously downplayed the severity of his initial injuries.

Representatives from Iran’s Health Ministry characterised his injuries as superficial, while senior officials have maintained that he continues to provide strategic oversight and operational directives for the country.

Despite these claims, the persistent lack of live appearances or direct public addresses has continued to fuel regional and international speculation about Khamenei’s health and the stability of his leadership.

Western and opposition intelligence sources have repeatedly suggested that he suffered severe or disfiguring injuries, while Iranian officials have offered contrasting accounts.