President Anura Kumara Dissanayake on Thursday appointed 29 Deputy Ministers

President Anura Kumara Dissanayake on Thursday appointed 29 Deputy Ministers supporting the Cabinet of 23 Ministers. The Deputy Ministers are:   Prof. Anil Jayantha Fernando – Deputy Minister of Economic Development; Namal Karunarathne – Deputy Minister of Agriculture and Livestock; Wasantha Piyathissa – Deputy Minister of Rural Development, Social Security and Community Empowerment; Nalin Hewage – Deputy Minister of Vocational Education; R.M. Jayawardena – Deputy Minister of Trade, Commerce and Food Security; Gamagedara Dissanayake – Deputy Minister of Buddhasasana, Religious and Cultural Affairs; T.B. Sarath – Deputy Minister of Housing; Rathna Gamage – Deputy Minister of Fisheries, Aquatic and Ocean Resources; Mahinda Jayasinghe – Deputy Minister of Labour; Aruna Jayasekara – Deputy Minister of Defence; Arun Kemachandra – Deputy Minister of Foreign Affairs and Foreign Employment; Anton Jayakody – Deputy Minister of Environment; Mohommed Muneer – Deputy Minister of National Integrity; Eranga Weerarathne – Deputy Minister of Digital Economy; Eranga Gunasekara – Deputy Minister of Youth Affairs; Chathuranga Abeysinghe – Deputy Minister of Industries and Entrepreneurship Development; Janith Ruwan Kodithuwakku – Deputy Minister of Ports and Civil Aviation; Dr. Namal Sudarshana – Deputy Minister of Women and Child Affairs; Ruwan Senarath – Deputy Minister of Provincial Councils and Local Governance; Dr. Prasanna Kumara Gunasena – Deputy Minister of Transport and Highways; Dr. Hansaka Wijemuni – Deputy Minister of Health and Media; Upali Samarasinghe – Deputy Minister of Co-operative Development; Ruwan Chaminda Ranasinghe – Deputy Minister of Tourism; Sugath Thilakarathne – Deputy Minister of Sports; Sundaralingam Pradeep – Deputy Minister of Plantation and Community Infrastructure; Attorney Sunil Watagala – Deputy Minister of Public Security and Parliamentary Affairs; Dr. Madhura Senevirathne – Deputy Minister of Education and Higher Education; Dr. Harshana Sooriyapperuma –Deputy Minister of Finance and Planning and Dr. Susil Ranasinghe – Deputy Minister of Land and Irrigation.