EFC new Chair reaffirms commitment to national employment policies and responsible business initiatives

The Employers’ Federation of Ceylon (EFC) recently concluded its 97th Annual General Meeting at the BMICH. At this general meeting, the Board of Trustees and Council Members representing different employer groups were appointed for the financial year 2026/27.

The outgoing Chairman, Dinesh Weerakkody expressed his appreciation to the Council, Members and the EFC Secretariat for the invaluable support extended to him throughout his tenure. Sanath Manatunge, Managing Director/CEO of the Commercial Bank of Ceylon PLC was appointed as the new EFC Chairman while Dinal Peiris, Chairman and Managing Director of the Lanka Aluminium Industries PLC Group was appointed as the Vice Chairman.

In his inaugural address, the new Chairman, while underlining the significance of the Federation, stated that, as the National Employers’ Organisation, the EFC will continue to contribute to labour law reforms that support future-ready businesses while driving responsible business initiatives. Manatunge who counts 36 years of experience having held very senior positions in the financial sector, presently serves on the Boards of Commercial Development Company PLC, and Commercial Bank of Maldives (Pvt) Ltd. as the Deputy Chairman. He is also the Chairman of the Sri Lanka Banks’ Association. Following his appointment as the new EFC Chair, the senior professional further emphasised the importance of engaging with the tripartite stakeholders to collaboratively advance shared objectives and strengthen Sri Lanka’s employment landscape.

Manatunge also represents key industry interests as a Member of the UNICEF Business Council, the Ceylon Chamber of Commerce, and the World Bank Group’s Private Sector Advisory Council. His regulatory and advisory contributions include serving as an Ex-Officio Member of the Stakeholder Engagement Committee of the Central Bank of Sri Lanka, as well as a Member of the Project Steering Committee (PSC) for the Central Bank’s Fraud Risk Management (FRM) System.

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.