SLT-MOBITEL Home Telephone offers unlimited calls

SLT-MOBITEL has unveiled an unlimited voice calling package tailored specially for families and small businesses.SLT-MOBITEL recognises that customers rely on SLT-MOBITEL’s fixed line services for clear, uninterrupted voice communication. The Unlimited Voice Package caters to this need comprehensively by removing all limitations on calling while providing the expected superior quality and reliability of its fixed line network

SLT-MOBITEL understands that the home phone is often a shared family resource. A key highlight is the package’s family-friendly approach, enabling the entire household to enjoy unlimited calling without restrictions. The package therefore embraces this reality enabling all family members and other customers who use a fixed line unlimited calls at an affordable price.

The SLT-MOBITEL Unlimited Voice Package delivers exactly what the name promises, unlimited local voice calls to any mobile or fixed network in Sri Lanka at an unbeatable monthly rental, offering unparalleled value. The package is particularly beneficial for families and small businesses that require reliable and high-quality wired communication.

The post-paid package at Rs. 747.00 only (excluding tax), provides exceptional affordability. Unlike other market options, the package is not restricted to SLT-MOBITEL networks but accommodates calls to any local mobile or fixed line network ensuring broader connectivity.

SLT-MOBITEL’s post-paid package also eliminates worries about running out of minutes and provides stable, uninterrupted service. In addition, SLT-MOBITEL ensures clear, secure, high-quality voice calls with no dropped connections or additional usage charges. The package is designed to meet the highest standards of reliability and customer satisfaction.

Axiata’s Telecom chief foresees $1 Trillion opportunity for global telcos

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.