Sword-wielding man goes on rampage in London; several people injured

A “man with a sword” has been arrested after reports several people have been stabbed, including two police officers, near a Tube station.

The Met Police received reports of a vehicle being driven into a house in Hainault and “there were reports people have been stabbed”.

“We understand the suspect went on to attack other members of the public and two police officers,” the force said.

Footage shared on social media showed a man with a long knife in Laing Close.

A 36-year-old man was arrested at the scene and is in custody after the vehicle was driven into a property in the Thurlow Gardens area, police said.

“We are awaiting an update on the condition of those injured,” the force added.

Hainault London Underground station is closed, Transport for London (TfL) says, and local buses are being diverted.

Deputy Assistant Commissioner Ade Adelekan said: “This must have been a terrifying incident for those concerned.

“I know the wider community will be feeling shock and alarm.”

He added: “People will want to know what has happened and will we provide more information as soon as we can.”

Police added the incident did not appear to be terror-related and officers were not looking for other suspects.

“We do not believe there is any ongoing threat to the wider community,” a spokesperson said.

Eyewitness Peter Kingdom says he was outside Hainault station as emergency services arrived, adding he was “anxious” to get home after finding out what had been happening.

The 56-year-old IT analyst from Hainault, said: “As I was walking to the station, I saw an ambulance heading towards the scene and another leaving.

“The road was blocked either side of the station entrance and all transport in the area was suspended. There was a helicopter circling the area.

“I didn’t see the man, just the ambulances, police, etc. I wasn’t concerned at first, but was a bit anxious to get back home after finding out what had happened.”

Wes Streeting, MP for Ilford North, wrote on X, formerly Twitter: “A critical incident has been declared in Hainault.”

“There are station and road closures in place. The police, ambulance service and fire brigade are responding.

“One male detained. I would urge people not to speculate until details are confirmed or post footage on social media.”