Commercial Bank in strategic partnership with Q&E to enhance SME capabilities

Commercial Bank has announced a strategic partnership with Q&E to enhance the capabilities of small and medium enterprises (SMEs) through the Commercial Bank LEAP Global Linker platform.

The Commercial Bank LEAP GlobalLinker is a pioneering initiative in Sri Lanka, spearheaded by the bank itself. It’s a cutting-edge ecosystem designed to foster networking opportunities both domestically and internationally. Developed with the backing of the International Finance Corporation (IFC), this platform is tailored to digitise enterprises and enhance business operations.

Aligned with global standards and leveraging the GlobalLinker platform, Commercial Bank LEAP GlobalLinker empowers SMEs and corporate clients to establish online stores at no cost, facilitating the sale of products and services. Through this platform, businesses can broaden their customer base, connect with potential investors and suppliers worldwide, bolster networking efforts, explore foreign markets, and unlock exclusive perks from partners. Additionally, it serves as a secure space for communication, fostering idea-sharing, collaborations, and knowledge exchange.

Under this collaboration, Q&E will play a crucial role in developing go-to-market strategies for SMEs, creating LEAP profiles and e-Stores, and enriching the LEAP Global Linker platform with specialised content and digital assets.

Commercial Bank Personal Banking/SMEs Assistant General Manager Ganeshan Sivasubramaniam emphasised the bank’s ongoing efforts to support SME growth: ”At Commercial Bank, we continuously strive to provide cutting-edge solutions to our customers. We invite SMEs to use the LEAP Global Linker platform to fuel their business success.”

“Q&E has over a period of three decades served several of the largest Sri Lankan corporate brands. Today, we are excited to expand our role by extending our service to the SME sector,” said Q&E CEO Dharshana Kumarawatte.

Empowering the SME sector is vital to Sri Lanka’s economy. Commercial Bank’s commitment to innovation and growth in the SME sector sets a new benchmark for development and support.

Interested SMEs should contact the Manager at their nearest Commercial Bank branch for more information and assistance, or visit the website directly at commercialbankleap.globallinker.com.