Fitch places Sri Lanka sovereign rating, 25 others, under criteria observation

ECONOMYNEXT – Fitch Ratings said it has placed 435 long-term debt ratings of 25 sovereigns, including Sri Lanka, Under Criteria Observation (UCO) following the publication of updated Sovereign Rating Criteria on September 15.

This designation indicates that the existing ratings may change as a result of the application of the updated criteria, the ratings agency said, adding that it will review all ratings placed on UCO within six months.

Fitch Places Long-Term Debt Ratings of 25 Sovereigns Under Criteria Observation

Fitch Ratings – London – 19 Sep 2025: Fitch Ratings has placed 435 long-term debt ratings of 25 sovereigns Under Criteria Observation (UCO) following the publication of updated Sovereign Rating Criteria on 15 September 2025.

The UCO designation indicates that the existing ratings may change as a direct result of the application of the updated criteria. It does not indicate a change in the underlying credit profile, nor does it affect existing Outlooks or Rating Watches.

Fitch will review all ratings placed on UCO within six months. Ratings placed on UCO will not necessarily change on the resolution of UCO.

A summary of the changes introduced by the updated criteria is available at www.fitchratings.com.

Introduction of Loss Severity Considerations. The addition of loss severity considerations to the ratings of long-term sovereign debt instruments means that debt instruments of sovereigns with Long-Term Issuer Default Ratings (IDR) of ‘B+’ or below, may be equalised (‘average recovery expectations), notched up (‘above average’ recovery expectations or better) or notched down (‘below average’ recovery expectations or worse) from the corresponding Long-Term IDR.

The final notching will depend on the recovery rate estimates, which will be linked to the assignment of corresponding Recovery Ratings.

Secured Debt Instruments. The ratings of secured sovereign debt instruments may also be affected by the introduction of loss severity assumptions in the criteria. This could affect the ratings of secured instruments across the rating scale. However, there are a limited number of outstanding secured instruments in Fitch’s rated portfolio.

Factors that Could, Individually or Collectively, Lead to Negative Rating Action/Downgrade

Long-term instrument ratings could be downgraded if recovery expectations are assessed as ‘below average’ or worse.

Existing negative rating sensitivities for each sovereign continue to apply. For more details, please see the most recent rating action commentary for each sovereign.

Factors that Could, Individually or Collectively, Lead to Positive Rating Action/Upgrade

Long-term instrument ratings could be upgraded if recovery expectations are assessed as ‘above average’ or better.

Existing positive rating sensitivities for each sovereign continue to apply. For more details, please see the most recent rating action commentary for each sovereign.

REFERENCES FOR SUBSTANTIALLY MATERIAL SOURCE CITED AS KEY DRIVER OF RATING

The principal sources of information used in the analysis are described in the Applicable Criteria.

The ESG Relevance Scores of each sovereign are in line with the ESG Relevance Scores of the applicable issuer, as outlined in their latest rating action commentary.