Bhikkunis’ Charikawa

The Bhikkus’ walk across much of the US was to promote peace in the world. With leaders like Trump, Putin and Netanyahu, world or regional peace is impossible to conceive of as a certainty or even possibility. But the Peace Walk initiated by 19 Vietnamese Buddhist monks – some reports also mentioned a Lankan monk – takes place and is a great succes with other benefits like gaining greater recognition of pure Buddhism, getting people peacefully together and the giving of alms and holding meetings. There was peaceful receiving of the monks have traveled through Texas, Louisiana, Mississippi Alabama, Georgia and to end their charika in Washington DC, after passing South and North Carolina. Fame was also brought to the Walk by their dog Aloka, a stray rescued in India, who though falling ill continued walking.

One of the inspiring stories in Buddhist history is that when Siddhartha Gotama returned to Kapilavastu soon after becoming the Buddha, reception was varied. But his step mother, Prajapati Gotami, believed in him and with 500 Sakyan women – mostly left by their husbands who had got ordained – wished to join the Sangha as bhikkunis. They were refused and the Buddha and his Sangha left to journey to Vaishali 300 km away. His stepmother and 600 women followed him. There, because of Ananda Thera persuading the Buddha to ordain the women, with eight extra vinaya rules given them, the Order of Buddhist nuns was started. Very historic and a shared legacy of India and Nepal. It was a very significant event: the first women’s institution in history and still very active.

This event was enacted recently by the Bhikkhuni’s Charika. The renunciation Trail of Sakyan women led by Prajapathi Gotami affirms and equal opportunity for all, free from gender discrimination. The United Theravada Bhikkuni San International, the Light of Buddhadamma Foundation and Nava Nalanda with the Tzu Chi Foundation have joined forces to commemorate that great event.

One hundread bhikkhunis and samaneris from 13 countries joined the Charika. They were united in spite of language barriers. They passed through sites such as Lumbibi and Kapilavassru. The highlight of the event was bringing Theri Sanghamitta’s relics from Sri Lanka. They were carried at the start of the procession each day.

Gratitude is expressed and generously given to Most Ven Bikkhuni Tathaloka Theri, who was the main organizer and planner. She was unable to join the event due to not being completely healthy but her presence would have been felt as she inspired all of them,

Much gratitude is given Ven Maitri who initially inspired the Walk and gave help in Nepal. Also to many Bhikkhunis and volunteers who offeed essential support ensuring the event proceeded smoothly. Sri Lankan Dhamma friends are also thanked.

“The event signifies not a conclusion, but rather an inception. We aspire for it to elevate awareness of Mahatheri Mahaprajapati’s eminent contributions to the establishment of the Bhikkhuni Sangha. Furthermore, we anticipate that this trail, emblematic of courage, conviction, and grit, will be acknowledged as a World Heritage trail.”

Residing in California, Bhikkhuni Tathaloka is a very vital Sangha member of the world group of Buddhist bhikkhunis, known best for helping to establish the Nuns’ Order. It is known that Theravada Buddhist countries like Sri Lanka and Thailand did not have the government nor the leader-monks approve the restarting of the Nuns’ Order. Thailand with a near military government still does not allow women to be ordained. Very fortuitously, Sri Lanka now has a government recognised Meheni Sassnaya. Aided by a monk who was much in the arts, a group of bhikkunis were ordained in India, Buddha Gaya, some years ago. There are several monasteries for these women and they are greatly respected by the people of the area. They are not ten preceptors now; they are fully ordained.

The first in the world to consider the necessity to have the fourth foundation of the Buddhist system in a country was Ven Brahmavamso of Perth Austrailia. He went ahead with his plan being in line with tradition to restart a Nuns’ Order. He requested Ven Tathaloka to assist him and thus the first ordination was of Ayya Vayama who had lived with Ayya Khema in Parappuduwa, and Ayya Seri.

Bhikkhuni Tathaloka Theri is a prominent American bhikkhuni known for her part in re-establishing the Nuns’ Order. She has a Monastery near Santa Rosa, CA, offering education, training, and Dhamma teaching. Being a member of the Bhikkhuni Alliance she is involved with the ordination of nuns in North America.

Ven Tathaloka Theri has stayed in Sri Lanka more than once. She wanted to telephone me to speak about this article but I was not able do so. Instead she sent much info to my niece who is a student of hers. She lives with her on her trips to the US. The Ven Theri loves Sri Lankan food so my niece cooks for her and cares for her.

Empowering the next generation: A vision for students’ leadership in Sri Lanka

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.