Indian High Commission welcomes NPP’s win in Sri Lanka, reaffirms commitment to bilateral ties

India extended wishes to Sri Lanka’s National People’s Power (NPP) party after their victory in the country’s parliamentary elections.

The High Commission of India in Colombo congratulated President and NPP leader Anura Kumara Dissanayake on the party’s win, reaffirming India’s commitment to strengthening bilateral ties between the two nations.

Sharing a post on X, the High Commission of India in Colombo wrote, “HC Santosh Jha called on the President & Leader of NPP Anura Kumara Dissanayake to congratulate on NPP’s victory in Sri Lanka #ParliamentaryElections2024.”

“As a fellow democracy, India welcomes the mandate & remains committed to further strengthening bilateral ties for the benefit of our people,” the post added.

Sri Lankan President Dissanayake’s leftist coalition registered a landslide victory in Sri Lanka’s snap parliamentary elections, according to official results announced by the country’s election commission.

The Left-leaning coalition won 159 seats in the 225-member parliament, according to the Sri Lanka Election Commission website as per the final results of the polls that were held on November 14.

Dissanayake, needed a clear majority to fulfil his promises and his NPP coalition secured a two-thirds majority in the 225-member parliament, winning 159 seats, whereas, opposition leader Premadasa’s party won 35 seats.

Opposition leader Sajith Premadasa’s (the son of former President Ranasinghe Premadasa) party the Samagi Jana Balawegaya (SJB) party won 40 seats and the New Democratic Front (NDF), backed by previous President Ranil Wickremesinghe, won just five seats.

The SLPP won 3 seats, while the ITAK was victorious in 8 seats, and the SB registered a win in only one seat. The SLMC won three seats while the UNP and the DTNA won one seat each.

According to a report by Al Jazeera, Dissanayake has pledged to abolish the country’s executive presidency, a system under which power is largely centralised under the president.

Dissanayake won the presidential elections held in September this year. With his coalition holding just three seats in the outgoing parliament, the 55-year-old leader of Janatha Vimukthi Peramuna (JVP) called snap legislative elections in search of a new mandate.

The parliamentary poll mandate enables Dissnayake to ease punishing austerity measures in crisis-stricken Sri Lanka.

Sri Lanka has been struggling to recover from its worst economic crisis since independence in 1948 following economic mismanagement by successive governments, the COVID-19 pandemic and 2019 Easter bombings.

In 2022, then-President Gotabaya Rajapaksa was forced to resign after tens of thousands of Sri Lankans took to the streets to protest sky-high inflation and fuel and food shortages.

Rajapaksa’s replacement Wickremesinghe, who finished third in September’s presidential election, oversaw a stabilising of the economy, but his government’s efforts to raise revenue, including by raising electricity bills and income taxes, proved unpopular with the public, Al Jazeera noted.

In the Sri Lankan unicameral parliament, all members are elected for a five-year term. But 29 out of 225 seats are decided indirectly through a national list.