Justice, politics and hypocrisy

The Criminal Investigation Department (CID) gave in to pressure from protesters and took former State Intelligence Service Chief Maj. Gen. (retd.) Suresh Sallay, in custody, to hospital and allowed his family members and lawyers to visit him. If it had done so previously and respected Sallay’s rights as a suspect, without leaving any room for allegations of physical and psychological abuse of him and other such police excesses, there would have been no protests.

Spokesman for the Archdiocese of Colombo Rev. Fr. Cyril Gamini Fernando has urged politicians and political parties to act with restraint and refrain from disrupting the ongoing investigations into the Easter Sunday terror attacks. The issue of Sallay allegedly undergoing ill-treatment at the hands of the CID is best left to the judiciary, he is reported to have said at a media briefing. His concerns should be heeded.

Protesters have categorically stated that they are not opposing the ongoing investigations in any manner and their intention is to ensure that the CID will stop violating the rights of Sallay held in custody under the PTA (Prevention of Terrorism Act), on a detention order issued by President Anura Kumara Dissanayake, who is also the Minister of Defence.

In this country, governments tend to undermine all institutions including the judiciary. They are no respecters of the doctrine of the separation of powers. There have been political witch-hunts against even some Chief Justices. The J. R. Jayewardene government sought to remove Chief Justice Neville Samarakoon over a public speech made by him; the Mahinda Rajapaksa administration ousted Chief Justice Dr. Shirani Bandarnayake in 2013 in a highly questionable manner, and the Maithripala Sirisena government removed Chief Justice Mohan Peiris in breach of due process in 2015. Political parties, lawyers’ associations and the media have been compelled to defend judicial independence against a proposed government move to raise the retirement ages of the Superior Court judges arbitrarily to the detriment of the judges awaiting promotion. It was vehement protests by lawyers, the Opposition and the media that prevented the Rajapaksa-Wickremesinghe government from summoning some Supreme Court judges before the Parliamentary Privileges Committee over a ruling that went against the interests of that administration.

Thus, given the overbearing nature of governments intoxicated with power, the task of protecting human rights cannot be achieved through judicial interventions alone. The challenge becomes even more daunting when the Attorney General’s Department and the police act in concert to serve the political interests of the powers that be.

Those who unashamedly cheered as their political opponents were arrested and detained under the PTA during previous governments have taken up the cudgels for Sallay’s rights. Prominent among them are SLPP and UNP politicians. However, the fact that previous governments abused the PTA and suspects suffered at the hands of the CID cannot be cited in extenuation of the continuation of the abuse of the PTA and the ill-treatment of detainees, including Sallay. The JVP-NPP government came to power, promising to usher in a new political culture and restore the rule of law. That pledge must be fulfilled.

Partisan politics does not spare anything in this country. The JVP-NPP government stands accused of having politicised the Easter Sunday carnage probe by appointing two members of the NPP’s Retired Police Collective as the Public Security Secretary and the CID Director. Is the Police Department short of competent investigators to handle crucial probes?

It is hoped that justice will be served for the victims of the Easter Sunday tragedy without injustice being done to the suspects under investigation.

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.