Standard Chartered Sri Lanka sets national benchmark as only EDGE Move certified organisation in Sri Lanka

Standard Chartered Sri Lanka has announced a milestone achievement, obtaining the EDGE Move certification for the second consecutive time, in its commitment to nurture gender equality in the workplace. The certification, the second-highest level offered by the EDGE Certified Foundation (Equity, Diversity, and Gender Equality), is also a national benchmark, as Standard Chartered Sri Lanka is the only organisation in the country to attain the distinguished recognition.

The EDGE Move certification acknowledges Standard Chartered Sri Lanka’s substantial progress and ongoing dedication to creating a diverse, equitable, and inclusive work environment. The certification process involves a comprehensive assessment of the Bank’s gender equality practices and policies, and a survey to measure employees’ experiences of Standard Chartered Sri Lanka in terms of providing equitable career opportunities. The EDGE assessment was enabled through EDGE Empower®, an integrated software for workplace diversity, equity, and inclusion (DE&I) that combines the power of the latest technology, DE&I expert knowledge, and experience. The certification was granted by an international Certification Body following an independent audit of all submissions made.

The EDGE assessment revealed Standard Chartered Sri Lanka’s exemplary performance in gender equality. The Bank demonstrated inclusive and gender-neutral hiring practices, robust gender diversity across four out of five levels of responsibility, and proactive pay equity measures widely acknowledged by employees. Notably, the effectiveness of the Bank’s policies and practices surpassed the EDGE Standard in all five areas analysed, demonstrating comprehensive commitment to workplace gender equality.

Commenting on the recognition, Bingumal Thewarathanthri, Chief Executive Officer, Standard Chartered Sri Lanka said, “Achieving the EDGE Move certification is a significant milestone for Standard Chartered Sri Lanka. It validates our deep commitment to creating an inclusive environment where all employees, regardless of gender, can reach their full potential. Our journey towards gender equality is ongoing, and we are dedicated to driving continuous progress in this crucial area.”

GSCS International and JAAF drive sustainable development in apparel sector

Softlogic Life backs Tharushi Karunarathne to take on the world

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.