Sri Lanka hosts ISGF ASPAC meeting: An initiative to inspire the next generation of youth

A Scouts’ event held during the ASPAC meeting held earlier this year

The International Scout and Guide Fellowship (ISGF) is an organisation that helps maintain the values learned in youth movements in order to provide a service within their communities. Recently, Sri Lanka hosted the Asia-Pacific regional committee meeting with the presence of Mariyam Shakeela, Chairman, Asia-Pacific Region Committee for the International Scout and Guide Fellowship and its Treasurer, Greg Davies.

“Each year we try to meet in fellowship around one of the countries in the Asia-Pacific region,” said Shakeela in an interview with the Daily Mirror. With 11 member countries onboard, the Committee visits other countries which have not yet become members.

“At this year’s meeting there were 15-16 members from nine other countries to discuss how we are going to each country individually and how we can help and foster relations within the Asia-Pacific region moving forward,” she said.

Scouting and guiding have principles; but, the way it is being done is different from country to country. Through this forum there was a huge benefit for the youth of this country. The basic idea is to create a youth community based on moral values. For this, we do different activities such as building bridges between multicultural communities

The ISGF promotes the spirit of scouting and guiding to the general community through fellowship, service and social activities. “One of our focus areas is to see the progress of the National Scout and Guide Fellowship (NSGF) in each member country and our hope is to create a transparent and empowered community of youth, carrying forward various values, love and understanding to serve the communities. We come as part of the Asia-Pacific region which comprises all NSGFs. When we come to Sri Lanka we like the youth of Sri Lanka to learn from the work that we do,” Davies added.

Speaking about the recently conducted youth forum with young scouts and guides between the ages 17-25, both Shakeela and Davies said that it was quite an interactive session where they learned from the young participants. “They were interested to find out more about what’s happening elsewhere and about what they could do to raise mental health awareness within their communities. The benefit for the Asia-Pacific committee is to learn from the cultural things that different people do. Scouting and guiding have principles; but, the way it is being done is different from country to country. Through this forum there was a huge benefit for the youth of this country. The basic idea is to create a youth community based on moral values. For this we do different activities such as building bridges between multicultural communities,” Shakeela emphasised.

Shakeela further said that girl guides in Sri Lanka have so much potential, energy and vitality and that they are passionate about what they are doing. “They are volunteers and are helping us remarkably well. In terms of scouting, Sri Lanka hosts a large jamboree. It brings together people from across the globe and is very welcoming and hospitable. Sri Lanka is a beautiful country in terms of people and their willingness to embrace those from other cultures,” added Davies.

In terms of scouting, Sri Lanka hosts a large jamboree. It brings together people from across the globe and is very welcoming and hospitable. Sri Lanka is a beautiful country in terms of people and their willingness to embrace those from other cultures

When asked how more youth could be encouraged to join youth movements, Shakeela said that as the Asia-Pacific committee, they discuss issues among youth in individual countries in order to bring about a transformative kind of thinking for the people. “It is the responsibility of the NSGF to translate those ideas or bring these into action with the youth. But the NSGF has to work with scouts or guide organisations in respective countries.”

According to Davies, in Sri Lanka, 100% scouting takes place in schools. “But once they finish school, unless there is a teacher they cannot be a leader. But our organisation works to keep the youth who are leaving school involved in supplying services to the younger children. In Australia for instance, 90% scouting happens outside school. We therefore need to get parents involved along with other young people who leave school. We have found that children involved in scouting and guiding are more adaptable and they developed coping mechanisms especially during the pandemic.”

Both Shakeela and Davies further said that one may not be an active guide and scout when they become an adult. “But whoever has been a scout or a guide should have that passion in them to work together to make this world a better place for tomorrow’s generations,” they said in conclusion.

Scouts, guides and representatives of the International Scout and Guide Fellowship at the recent Asia-Pacific Region Committee meeting