Sri Lankan exporters create new business opportunities at Hotel Asia 2026

EDB says deals worth $ 50,000 concluded with further $ 150,000 at discussion stages

The Sri Lanka Export Development Board (EDB), in collaboration with the High Commission of Sri Lanka in the Maldives and the Sri Lanka Maldives Business Council, organised Sri Lanka Pavilion at the Hotel Asia Exhibition and International Culinary Challenge 2026, held from 28 to 30 September 2026 in Hulhumalé, Maldives.

EDB said the Sri Lanka Pavilion provided an important platform for 20 Sri Lankan companies to showcase their products and services to Maldivian buyers, importers, distributors, hotel and resort operators and other industry stakeholders. The Sri Lanka Pavilion promoted Sri Lanka as a reliable source of quality products and services and also highlighted the capabilities and diversity of Sri Lankan suppliers.

The participation mainly focused on creating new business opportunities for Sri Lankan companies in the food and beverage, hospitality, tourism and related sectors. During the exhibition, participating companies had the opportunity to meet potential buyers and business partners, introduce their products and services, exchange business information and discuss possible areas of cooperation.

The participation of Sri Lankan exporters at Hotel Asia 2026 generated promising business opportunities in the Maldivian market. Several participating companies received business inquiries and established new contacts with potential buyers, importers and industry representatives, creating opportunities for export orders, distributorships, supply arrangements and long-term business partnerships.

The participating exporters received confirmed orders valued at approximately $ 50,000 for fruit purees, king coconut water, fruit beverages and hot beverages, including 3-in-1 milk tea premix, while orders valued at approximately $ 150,000 for cinnamon and fruit purees are currently under negotiation. In addition, two participating companies signed agreements with Maldivian importers, further strengthening business linkages between Sri Lankan exporters and Maldivian buyers.

The participation also provided an opportunity to promote Sri Lanka Expo 2027 among potential buyers/investors and engage with the Maldives Business Chamber to encourage greater participation and business cooperation in the future.

The exhibition gives an opportunity to gain a better understanding of the requirements of the Maldivian market. Direct discussions with hotel, resort and other industry representatives provided valuable information on market needs and potential opportunities in the growing tourism and hospitality industry.

The successful participation at Hotel Asia 2026 supported the strengthening of trade and business relations between Sri Lanka and the Maldives and contributed to the EDB’s efforts to assist Sri Lankan exporters in entering new markets and developing sustainable international business partnerships, the EDB said.