Sri Lanka to reduce power tariff through capital cost cuts, delayed non-essential maintenance

ECONOMYNEXT — Sri Lanka’s state-run Ceylon Electricity Board (CEB) plans to reduce power tariffs by a “considerable” amount through proposed reductions in capital and maintenance costs as well as postponement of non-essential maintenance work.

CEB Deputy General Manager Noel Priyantha told reporters that, while it does carry some risk, maintenance and repairs deemed non-essential have been postponed to 2025 and 2026.

“We plan to greatly reduce our capital costs and maintenance costs, through which we expect to provide a considerable reduction in tariffs. What we did was push maintenance and repairs to 2025, 2026. There is a small risk there,” he said.

The official explained that a recent reduction in tariffs by a relatively low 3 to 3.4 percent was due in part to costs involved in activities including maintenance work at the CEB’s extensive network of power stations.

“Profits from the November, December rains were carried forward to 2024. We proposed this year’s tariff with that taken into account. We also planned to do several things that we had missed. CEB owns a large number of power stations. The pandemic came, and then the country went bankrupt. Because of the dollar crisis we couldn’t carry out essential maintenance work. This year we have assigned maximum maintenance,” said Priyantha.

The previous tariff proposal was thus sent to the regulator, the Public Utilities Commission of Sri Lanka (PUCSL), taking into account such tasks the CEB could not carry out due to various reasons, according to Priyantha.

“This was why we had to reduce the tariff by an amount as low as 3 to 3.4 percent. Then we held public consultations. Everyone said in one voice to reduce the tariff. The PUCSL as regulator gave us some criteria, to discuss with the government and move a few these things around and reduce loading a big cost for 2024 and defer it if possible,” he said.

“Which meant do the essential things in 2024, and whatever that can be postponed be moved around a bit,” he said. (Colombo/Feb21/2024)