Sri Lanka’s NPP continues to lead voting intent poll ahead of main opposition

ECONOMYNEXT —  Sri Lanka’s leftist National People’s Power (NPP) continued to lead a voting intentions poll in January at 40 percent of adult voters surveyed supporting the party, with the main opposition Samagi Jana Balawegaya (SJB) in second place at 30 percent.

The survey, carried out by Institute for Health Policy (IHP) using its Sri Lanka Opinion Tracker Survey (SLOTS) Multilevel Regression and Poststratification (MRP) model showed no substantial change in general election voting intentions in January 2024 compared to the previous month.

The NPP managed to maintain a lead with 40 percent of Sri Lankan adult voters (-1 since December 2023), while the SJB led the rest at 30 percent (+2) in January. The ruling Sri Lanka Podujana Peramuna (SLPP) was at 8 percent (no change) while President Ranil Wickremesinghe’s United National Party (UNP) stood at 6 percent. (-1). Meanwhile, the Ilankai Thamil Arasu Kachchi (ITAK), the main constituent of the Tamil National Alliance (TNA) showed 4 percent (no change) support

The January estimates are provisional and are associated with a margin of error of 1.0–3.6 percent for the four leading parties, the IHP said in a statement on Wednesday February 28.

“These estimates are based on the Januar 2024 revision of the IHP SLOTS MRP model, which smoothed monthly changes and reduced monthly fluctuations due to sampling noise. Unlike previous months which highlighted voting intent in likely voters, these estimates are for all adults. IHP is working on improving its likely voter model and will resume release of voting intent in likely voters in a future update. But it should be noted that differences in voting intent shares between all adults and likely voters have typically been 1–2 percent for most estimates in the past two years,” the institute said.

“This January 2024 update is based on 15,590 interviews conducted with adults across Sri Lanka since October 2021, with 506 interviews carried out in Januar 2024. IHP’s SLOTS MRP methodology first estimates the relationship between a wide variety of characteristics about respondents and their opinions – in this case, “If there was a General Election today, which

party would you vote for”– in a multilevel statistical model. It then uses a large data file that is calibrated to the national population to predict voting intent in each month since October 2021, according to what the multilevel model says about their probability of voting for various parties (‘post-stratification’) at each point in time. The multilevel model was estimated 100 times to reflect underlying uncertainties in the model and to obtain margins of error.” (Colombo/Feb29/2024)