KOKO joins Mastercard ‘Tap for Change’ campaign

From left: Sachini Jayathilaka - Marketing - Sri Lanka & Maldives, Malishini Punchihewa - Manager, Retail & Commerce, Dhanushka Thenabadu - Manager, Account Management,  Sandun Hapugoda - Country Manager , Bangladesh, Bhutan, Maldives, Nepal & Sri Lanka, Michael Sathasivam - Regional CEO KOKO, Dinuki Karunatilake - Head of KOKO, Shimry Naizer - Head of Strategic Partnerships and Alliances, Manodharshan Sendilkumar – Manager Lifestyle and Aaqil Yoosoof - Manager Marketing

KOKO, a leading Buy Now Pay Later platform, has joined the Mastercard ‘Tap for Change’ campaign, designed to turn everyday transactions into contributions towards long-term cancer care infrastructure in Sri Lanka. Through Mastercard contactless Tap & Go payments and KOKO-powered e-commerce transactions, consumers can help raise funds for the development of the Karapitiya Trail Cancer Hospital, in collaboration with the COC Foundation.

The campaign is built around the message ‘Tap for Change,’ highlighting how simple actions, such as tapping Mastercard or using it for shopping through the KOKO platform can support a national cause. The initiative aims to raise funds for the Karapitiya Trail Cancer Hospital and encourage wider adoption of contactless payments, to demonstrate how digital commerce can help create meaningful community impact.

Through its support, KOKO extends Mastercard’s Tap for Change campaign into the e-commerce and buy now, pay later ecosystem, granting its wide, digital-native customer base the opportunity to contribute through the purchases they make. KOKO’s platform enables users to shop online and pay later, making regular lifestyle purchases more accessible while connecting the transactions to a purpose-led initiative.

For Mastercard, the campaign reinforces the role of digital payments in enabling convenient and socially meaningful transactions. Encouraging consumers to use contactless Tap & Go payments, the initiative supports payment innovation and public participation in a cause focused on improving cancer care access in Sri Lanka.

The campaign is especially relevant for tech-savvy Gen Z and Millennial shoppers who frequently use KOKO, as well as Mastercard cardholders, retail merchants, and the broader Sri Lankan community seeking simple ways to support social causes. Linking routine spending to a healthcare infrastructure goal, makes the initiative of giving more accessible and seamlessly integrated into daily life.

Sandun Hapugoda, Country Manager, Sri Lanka and Maldives, Mastercard said, “Mastercard is delighted to welcome KOKO as a partner in support of the ‘Tap for Change’ campaign. This collaboration highlights the power of the digital commerce ecosystem to drive meaningful impact, enabling everyday transactions to contribute to long-term causes, such as strengthening cancer care infrastructure in the country.”

“There are moments in life when business stops being about growth charts and numbers and becomes something far more human,” commented Michael Sathasivam, Regional CEO, KOKO. “With Tap for Change, spending and giving now happen in the very same moment. Koko customers do not need to stop and think about charity, you simply live your life, and in doing so, you give.”