BRICS: the bridge for Sri Lanka to engage Global South widely

It has become increasingly important for Sri Lanka to join BRICS because of its strategic positioning

Another significant initiative in this regard is the Colombo Security Conclave, which brings together the island nations of the Indian Ocean under a common regional security framework

The 18th BRICS Summit held in New Delhi has gained attention in the Western media because the event unfolded against the backdrop of a thaw between India and China, which are otherwise seen as strategic rivals. Indian analysts see the BRICS summit as an opportunity to realise the bloc’s full potential for trade. It is a grouping that accounts for 40 per cent of global GDP and more than a quarter of world trade.

BRICS, an acronym derived from the names of its initial members, has brought together countries of the Global South around a common agenda despite their differences. Both China and India find common ground within the group, although their bilateral relationship soured after a military clash along their disputed Himalayan border in 2020. Changes in the world order have prompted them to come together to enhance their ties, at least in the trade and economic spheres.

On the sidelines of the summit, Prime Minister Narendra Modi and President Xi Jinping met. It was Chinese President Xi’s first trip to India in seven years.

The Chinese side struck a note of optimism following the meeting. A statement from the Chinese Foreign Ministry said that the two leaders had a sincere and in-depth exchange of views and reached an important consensus that China and India should be partners.

President Xi pointed out that China always approaches and develops its relations with India from a strategic and long-term perspective.

Beijing’s Foreign Ministry said, “President Xi made four observations on promoting the steady and sustained development of China-India relations. First, calibrate the direction with an objective and rational strategic perception. China and India are partners rather than rivals, and development opportunities rather than threats to each other. This is a strategic judgement made based on the development stage and international environment of the two countries, and one that conforms to the common interests of the two countries and the two peoples. Second, help each other succeed in the spirit of win-win cooperation. Both sides should focus on development as the greatest common denominator, and strengthen friendly exchanges and mutually beneficial cooperation. It is important to expand cooperation in people-to-people exchanges, direct flights, and other areas to effectively improve the public perception of bilateral relations. The two sides should also address each other’s economic and trade concerns in a balanced way and promote the sound and steady development of economic and trade relations. Third, remove irritants with the political wisdom of mutual respect and mutual understanding. The two sides should stay committed to advancing bilateral relations and resolving the boundary question, seek parallel, mutually reinforcing progress, and maintain peace and tranquillity in the border areas. Fourth, contribute to a better world with open and inclusive multilateral coordination. The two sides should support each other’s BRICS chairship, strengthen coordination in the United Nations, the Shanghai Cooperation Organisation, and the G20, work together to address global challenges, and unequivocally uphold international fairness and justice.”

According to the same document, Prime Minister Modi recalled the many productive meetings he has had with President Xi, which have guided India-China relations in a positive direction and serve the common interests of the over 2.8 billion people of the two countries. As two major civilisations, India and China have engaged in exchanges and mutual learning and moved forward hand in hand for thousands of years. India always views its relations with China from a strategic and long-term perspective. It hopes to be a partner, not a rival, of China, and regards each other’s development as an opportunity, not a challenge. India has an independent foreign policy, and developing relations with China is not affected by any third party. India’s policy and position on issues relating to Taiwan and Tibet remain unchanged, and it will not allow any force to engage in anti-China activities on its territory. The Indian side would like to work with China on the basis of mutual respect and mutual trust to maintain high-level exchanges, strengthen strategic communication, promote mutually beneficial cooperation, and deepen people-to-people exchanges, so that bilateral relations will enjoy greater development. The two sides should work together to maintain peace and tranquillity in the border areas. India appreciates China’s support for its hosting of the BRICS Summit and will fully support China’s BRICS chairship next year. India will maintain close coordination and collaboration with China to jointly promote stronger Global South cooperation, advance world multipolarity and economic growth, and act as a force for stability and progress in a turbulent world.

Multipolarity is increasing in the world today, and regional bodies like BRICS are becoming important platforms for common understanding and decision-making. Sri Lanka has also sought membership of BRICS. But, for reasons hitherto unknown, the current government did not make any effort to attend this year’s summit in New Delhi.

The last BRICS Summit was held in Kazan, Russia, in 2024. Ahead of the summit, Russia had extended an invitation to then Sri Lankan President Ranil Wickremesinghe from Russian President Vladimir Putin. Yet, following the September 21 presidential election, the government changed, with Mr Anura Kumara Dissanayake becoming President. The same invitation was extended to him. But Sri Lanka only sent a delegation headed by then Foreign Secretary Aruni Wijewardane. The advisors of the new President would have thought that it would have been ill-advised to break the tradition of making the first official visit to India upon election to office. Nevertheless, Sri Lanka should have figured out a way to enhance its engagement with BRICS at that time. It was possible because India is also a member state.

Despite President Dissanayake being well-entrenched in office this time, he sought to stay away from BRICS. Yet, this entails disadvantages for Sri Lanka from a diplomatic point of view. Of course, the Government is not in a position to let its ties with the United States (U.S.) sour at this time because the U.S. accounts for 23 per cent of Sri Lanka’s merchandise exports. The Government may have feared that its closeness to BRICS would jeopardise its relations with the U.S. under the Trump administration. Sri Lanka cannot afford to face punitive tariffs.

But the country has its limits in this regard. It should diversify its market opportunities and cooperation with like-minded countries. BRICS is a gateway to the Global South.

BRICS has become a central point for many of these groupings in the Global South. South Africa is in BRICS but not in the Shanghai Cooperation Organisation, while Brazil is also in BRICS. It takes certain decisions and implements them in its own way, since there is no secretariat for implementation.

It has become increasingly important for Sri Lanka to join BRICS because of its strategic positioning.

The Indian Ocean is becoming increasingly crucial, with China also expanding its presence in the region from economic, security and political perspectives.

Another significant initiative in this regard is the Colombo Security Conclave, which brings together the island nations of the Indian Ocean under a common regional security framework.

When Mr Wickremesinghe was President, the agreement was formalised in Colombo, and it was decided that the city should serve as the centre of this grouping.

The objective was to build Colombo into a focal point for regional security and diplomatic cooperation in the Indian Ocean. The current Government now has the responsibility of providing the necessary diplomatic and institutional support to those working within the Conclave and ensuring that Colombo continues to play a central role in its activities.

Sri Lanka, as a country, tries hard to maintain a balance in its ties with India and China. The two countries, despite warming up to each other, continue to have differences as major powers. In the Indian Ocean, the two obviously have competing interests. India does not want Sri Lanka to fall within China’s sphere of influence. So does China.

When Sri Lanka is also part of BRICS, it will be easier to strike a balance in its relations with China and India.

When the two countries do not feel paranoid about each other’s engagements here, Sri Lankan authorities will have a more hassle-free approach. It will help Sri Lanka develop its strategic autonomy without becoming overdependent on any power. Geographical proximity is, anyway, a determinant of some special ties with India, though.

In maritime trade, Sri Lanka can even serve as a connectivity point. To explore all such possibilities, it is important for the Government to expedite the process of obtaining BRICS membership.