Twelve police officers injured on second night of unrest in Northern Ireland

BBC - Twelve police officers were injured and 16 arrests were made in the second night of unrest in Northern Ireland following the Belfast knife attack, Northern Ireland Secretary Hilary Benn has said.

Most of the disorder was concentrated along one street in Glengormley - just outside of Belfast - where police deployed a water cannon to disperse a crowd. The group gathered close to the Sandyknowes roundabout and individuals had been seen throwing missiles at the police and setting bins alight.

The protests and violence were sparked after a man was left with serious injuries, including losing an eye, after being attacked in north Belfast on Monday night

A 30-year-old Sudanese man appeared in Belfast Magistrates' Court earlier charged with attempted murder.

The family of the victim, Stephen Ogilvie, said they did not want this "terrible tragedy to be used to divide people or fuel hostility," and apppealed for privacy.

Northern Ireland Secretary Hilary Benn condemned the "racist thuggery" seen in the wake of the Belfast knife attack.

Asked on Sky News whether these were racist riots rather than protests, he said: "Well, if you are targeting people on the basis of the colour of their skin how else can you describe them? That is racist thuggery, there's no question about it at all."

Mr Benn also said: "We've had reports of people being stopped in their cars to be asked what their nationality is on their way to work, and this is completely unacceptable."

Police have released a number of images following the disorder of people they would like to speak to.

Some 200 mutual aid officers will be on the ground from Thursday and on Wednesday afternoon Chief Constable Jon Boutcher insisted those responsible for the disorder will be dealt with according to the law.

Northern Ireland's Deputy First Minister Emma Little-Pengelly said those who have been engaging in disorder across Belfast are "only destroying their own communities and the cause they claim to support".

Little-Pengelly told BBC Breakfast that while people in Northern Ireland and across the UK have concerns around immigration and vetting, people are "trying to use those genuinely held concerns in the wider community to try to bring that disorder and violence, and indeed at times racism to the streets of Belfast".

"My message is very clear to those people who are intent on doing so – they do absolutely nothing to support the cause of getting those issues amplified."

Threats have been made to healthcare staff and a nurse was chased into a hospital by masked men, a union has said.

Patricia McKeown from Unison said on Wednesday evening a nurse "with a different skin colour" was chased into the Ulster Hospital by four masked men.

She said it was "it's not good enough to call for calm" and leaders must take action.

The union has also said that health workers have been left terrified after a "threat" was made against those from overseas who work at Whiteabbey hospital.

"When we say the call to arms on social media we knew our overseas members would be under threat," McKeown told BBC Radio Ulster's Good Morning Ulster programme.

Wednesday's violence was not to the same extent as Tuesday nights that saw condemnation from politicians and police.

A Department for Infrastructure depot was broken into and a vehicle set alight at Sandyknowes Belfast.

The Minister Liz Kimmins condemned it and the disorder was "disgraceful and disgusting".

Prime Minister Sir Keir Starmer said those behind the violence "will feel the full force of the law"

In Londonderry, police advised motorists to avoid the Ardmore Road at the Church Brae junction due to items on fire.

There were also peaceful protests at Stormont Estate and Coleraine.

The Northern Health Trust said some outpatient appointments were rescheduled and some services stood down "as a precautionary measure" at the nearby Whiteabbey Hospital.

Hadi Alodid, a 30-year-old originally from Sudan, appeared in court on Wednesday charged with attempted murder over the attack that caused serious injuries to the victim, Stephen Ogilvie.

He is also charged with possession of a knife in a public place and threats to kill an NHS worker.

Ogilvie, who is in his 40s, has lost his left eye and has damage to his right eye, along with injuries to his neck and back.

The victim's family said that in response to "false information circulating on social media" they needed to "clarify" that he is in a "stable" condition.

They also appealed for "peaceful protest as the only way forward" and said there were "many migrants who make a deeply valuable contribution to our country".