Stop harassment of Suresh Sallay: Free Lawyers Association

Colombo, June 9 (Daily Mirror) - Free Lawyers Association yesterday urged the authorities to provide necessary medical treatment to former State Intelligence Service (SIS) Chief and amend laws which pave the way for the harassment of Sallay and others who are held under the Prevention of Terrorism Act (PTA).

“We are deeply saddened on the harassment for which Sallay is subjected to by the authorities,” a statement signed by the Free Lawyers Association Convener Maithri Gunaratne and Chief Executive Officer Rajith Keerthi Tennekoon said.

It has been reported that Sallay has suffered significant weight loss of 6–7 kg in two months, intertriginous dermatitis, nutritional deficiencies (including Vitamin D insufficiency), marginally elevated blood sugar and cholesterol, and exacerbated pre-existing migraines. He is also diagnosed with a moderate to severe depressive episode accompanied by prominent anxiety symptoms and features of Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder (PTSD). The forensic psychiatrist described these as “typical of” torture or ill-treatment, noting a high risk of suicide. Mr. Sallay reported feelings of internal collapse, nightmares, poor appetite, guilt, and constant stress, the statement said.

While the report notes no acute external physical injuries and confirms he remains fit to plead and stand trial, it underscores the urgent need for comprehensive multidisciplinary medical and psychiatric care in a safe therapeutic environment.

Despite police claims of equal treatment, these findings highlight serious risks of ill-treatment and neglect in PTA detention. The Act’s provisions allow prolonged administrative detention potentially up to one year or more—without prompt judicial oversight or formal charges. Mr. Sallay’s high-profile case draws attention to the plight of numerous other lesser-known PTA detainees who may endure similar conditions outside effective judicial scrutiny.

This situation raises grave questions about Sri Lanka’s compliance with its international obligations under the Optional Protocol to the Convention against Torture (OPCAT), particularly ahead of the upcoming visit by the UN Subcommittee on Prevention of Torture (SPT).

The Free Lawyers urged the authorities to immediately ensure independent, comprehensive medical and psychiatric treatment for Mr. Sallay and all PTA detainees in appropriate therapeutic settings, with regular access for family members and legal counsel, bring all detainees before competent judicial authorities without further delay, either to file recognisable charges or order their release, guarantee fundamental safeguards against torture, ill-treatment, and arbitrary detention in all places of custody, in line with Sri Lanka’s constitutional and international commitments and Initiate meaningful reform or repeal of the PTA to eliminate provisions enabling prolonged detention without judicial oversight.

“We stand ready to engage with the Sri Lankan Human Rights Commission (as the National Preventive Mechanism), the authorities, and the forthcoming UN SPT delegation to provide detailed information and contribute to strengthening preventive mechanisms against torture and ill-treatment,” the statement also said.