22nd Amendment gazetted amidst warning by President’s Counsels

As the government gazetted the 22nd Amendment to the Constitution to extend the retirement age of Supreme Court judges to 67 and Court of Appeal judges to 65, a group of senior President's Counsels warned of tough action to force the government to abandon the proposed amendment.

"The date of retirement of the Chief Justice shall be either the date on which he or she reaches the age of sixty-seven years or the date on which a period of six years is completed from the date of appointment as the Chief Justice, whichever occurs earlier," the gazette said.

President's Counsel and former President of the Bar Association of Sri Lanka, Anura Meddegoda, commenting on the development, said members of the legal fraternity would take action against the move step by step.

"We will take to the streets if it is necessary but we will take action to prevent the enacting of the legislation step by step," he said.

Meddegoda said introducing a new Constitution would be a better option than making patchwork amendments to the Constitution to fulfil political ambitions.

"The National People's Power (NPP) manifesto clearly speaks of a new Constitution. The NPP obtained a mandate for such a move. What the government should do now is introduce a new Constitution as pledged," he said.

He said a dialogue should be initiated to determine whether the country should return to a Westminster system or adopt a different system of governance with the abolition of the Executive Presidency.

Responding to the reasons already given by the government for its decision to extend the retirement age of judges, he said the existing vacancies in the Supreme Court and Court of Appeal should be filled while increasing the number of High Court judges to 110 from the current 93.

President's Counsel Thisath Wijegunawardene said the 22nd Amendment has to be approved by the people through a referendum, as the Supreme Court has already ruled.

President's Counsel Sudath Wickramaratne said there are other issues the government should address rather than focusing on extending the retirement age of judges.

"The Government should first resolve the issues faced by paddy farmers and arrest the high cost of living first," he said.