Sri Lanka strengthens investor links with Australia

The Securities and Exchange Commission of Sri Lanka (SEC), Colombo Stock Exchange (CSE) and stockbroking industry are conducting a series of Invest Sri Lanka investor forums in Australia, with multiple forums to be held in Melbourne and Sydney.

The forums will be held in Sydney and Melbourne from August 17, 2026 to August 20, 2026.

Invest Sri Lanka Investor Forum – Australia 2026 follows the Invest Sri Lanka investor forums held in Dubai and Riyadh earlier in January.

Capitalising on the growth and stability achieved in the Sri Lankan capital market in 2025, the Invest Sri Lanka investor forums of 2026 are set to leverage on Sri Lanka’s status as an attractive frontier market and will seek to attract institutional investors and the Sri Lankan diaspora.

The SEC and CSE will be returning to Australia after nearly nine years, following the last Invest Sri Lanka Investor Forum Australia conducted in 2017.

The 2017 roadshow played an important role in strengthening investor awareness of Sri Lanka among the investors in Australia, with the buy turnover rising over 700 percent from Rs.72.9 million to Rs.603.8 million within the six-month window, following the forums.

As of end-2025, the buy turnover has risen to Rs.1.85 billion, with Australia emerging as one of the top 10 sources of foreign investor inflows into the Sri Lankan capital market and as one of the top 10 sources of remittance inflows from the growing Sri Lankan diaspora in Australia.

With the strong rise in Sri Lanka’s All-Share-Price-Index (ASPI) over the past 10 years, a rising number of Sri Lankan diaspora investors have taken an interest in the Sri Lankan stock market.

The forums will be conducted amidst a remarkable six-year growth in the capital market, which saw the ASPI rise from 4,846 points in May 2020 to 22,310.80 points by end-May 2026. This represents a growth of 360 percent and a compound annual growth rate of approximately 28.98 percent.

Furthermore, Sri Lanka’s equity market stands above the regional competitors, with a market price-to-earnings (P/E) ratio of 11.20 x, enjoying Asia’s second lowest (P/E) ratio, offering a strong upside potential for the investors seeking frontier market exposure.

Commenting on Sri Lanka’s investment landscape and the importance of engaging with international investors, SEC Chairman Senior Prof. D.B.P.H. Dissabandara, stated, “Sri Lanka is strengthening its capital market through robust regulation, greater transparency and stronger investor protection, creating a more trusted and resilient environment for investors. We invite the Australian investors to explore the opportunities emerging in our market.”

High-level government officials, regulators, listed companies, leading stockbroking firms and international investors will convene at the forum, to foster connections and promote long-term capital flows into Sri Lanka.

CSE Executive Vice President Marketing Niroshan Wijesundere commented that there is a strong interest in the forums, with the registrations for several sessions already exceeding capacity.

CHEC Port City Colombo (Pvt.) Ltd is participating in the Invest Sri Lanka investor forums in Australia as a collaborative partner, joining the SEC and CSE in bringing Sri Lanka’s investment proposition to the Australian investors and businesses.

“Australia represents a significant market for Sri Lanka and this forum provides a timely platform to engage directly with the investors who are well-positioned to recognise the opportunity. We look forward to sharing what Port City Colombo has to offer as part of Sri Lanka’s broader investment story,” stated CHEC Port City Colombo Managing Director Xiong Hongfeng.

The Board of Investment of Sri Lanka will also be participating in the forums, further strengthening the representation of key stakeholders driving the country’s investment and economic development agenda.

Joining as the platinum sponsor, the Hatton National Bank group will be supporting the forums as the forums facilitate engagement between investors, businesses and industry leaders.

The speakers and panellists at the events include Industry and Entrepreneurship Development Deputy Minister Chathuranga Abeysinghe, Central Bank Governor Dr. P. Nandalal Weerasinghe, High Commissioner of Sri Lanka to Australia Yasoja Gunesekara, SEC Chairman Senior Prof D.B.P.H. Dissabandara, CSE Director Ray Abeywardena, Board of Investment of Sri Lanka Director General Dr. Sulakshana Jayawardena, Consul General of Sri Lanka to Victoria, South Australia and Tasmania Pradeepa Saram, CSE CEO Rajeeva Bandaranaike, Lynear Wealth Management Co-Founder and Managing Director Dr. Naveen Gunawardane, ACP Corum Pty Ltd Executive Director Charles Blake, Hatton National Bank PLC Managing Director and CEO Damith Pallewatte and CHEC Port City Colombo Deputy Managing Director Thulci Aluwihare.

All of them will be sharing their insights, highlighting the country’s ongoing economic reforms, financial stability and capital market potential through a series of panel discussions and presentations. The registered participants will get the opportunity to access to a series of sessions offering in-depth insights into Sri Lanka’s capital markets, economic outlook and investment opportunities. The programme will also feature a high-level panel discussion, featuring leaders and market experts who will share their perspectives on macroeconomic trends, market performance and future growth opportunities.

The forum will highlight the resilience and potential of the market, showcasing recent policy reforms, improved infrastructure and a robust ecosystem that supports sustainable investment.

2025 saw the Sri Lankan capital market prosper amidst significant reforms and positive economic developments, making it an attractive platform for investment and providing opportunities for institutional investors and fund managers globally.