CPC shocks continue

The latest round of fuel price hikes in Sri Lanka came on Saturday night as global oil trading closed, with the price of crude posting its biggest one-month decline (20%) in six years and with international media reporting that the oil price drop had delivered some relief to consumers at the pump in many countries, such as Pakistan, Malaysia, Spain and Portugal. At this rate, Sri Lanka’s fuel prices may continue to soar even if US President Donald Trump behaves and the US and Iran agree to end the West Asia conflict early, paving the way for the reopening of the Hormuz chokepoint for international navigation.

However, it should be noted that global oil market volatility is not yet over. ExxonMobil’s Senior Vice President Neil Chapman has reportedly warned that energy prices may “explode upwards in the coming weeks, with crude oil prices rising to USD160 or more per barrel as dwindling reserve inventories finally bottom out”. This is an unnerving proposition. One dreads to think what the Ceylon Petroleum Corporation (CPC) and the government will do in such an eventuality.

President Anura Kumara Dissanayake recently claimed that fuel was sold below cost in this country; a litre of diesel cost the CPC as much as Rs. 720 but was priced at only Rs. 392. He also said the subsidies on diesel and petrol amounted to Rs. 100 and Rs. 20 per litre, respectively. It was obvious that the President was priming the public for another round of fuel price hikes, which were announced on Saturday night while the people were out viewing Vesak decorations. The CPC has reminded them of how painful the samsaric journey is.

The government insists that fuel prices must be cost reflective in keeping with IMF bailout conditions, but it has chosen to remain silent on whether it uses the same pricing formula as the previous governments for fuel price revisions. Government politicians and the CPC make contradictory claims on this issue. The public has a right to ascertain whether the fuel prices are cost reflective, as claimed by the Finance Ministry, or way above actual costs. Governments in this country have earned notoriety for price gouging, just like black marketeers. So, the CPC or the Finance Ministry ought to make public how the fuel price revisions are determined. This is something the Opposition ought to pressure the government to do.

It is being argued in some quarters that the government increases fuel prices to recover staggering losses arising from the use of diesel to keep the oil-fired power plants working to compensate for the Norochcholai generation loss caused by the fraudulent procurement of low-grade coal. This argument is tenable, given the colossal amounts of diesel being burnt to generate electricity. Opposition trade unionists have claimed that more than 800,000 litres of diesel are used daily to make up for the generation drop at Norochcholai.

Another ship has arrived, carrying substandard coal, and more diesel will have to be burnt to compensate for power generation losses it is bound to cause, the Opposition has warned. Following a revelation made by HSBC Group’s CEO, Georges Elhedery, in a fireside chat with Bloomberg TV that Sri Lanka had imported oil at USD 286 per barrel, the CPC admitted that it had bought three shipments of diesel between the last week of March and the second week of April at prices of between USD 288 and USD 281 per barrel. Was the CPC so desperate because it had to procure extra shipments of diesel to keep the oil-fired power plants running to prevent power cuts?

The JVP/NPP has had to increase fuel prices, which they promised to slash while out of power. It said it was capable of causing the country’s forex woes to disappear in no time, as its rise to power would trigger a huge inflow of dollars. The current Opposition is making similar claims. We have no shortage of ‘promising’ politicians.

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.