Steps leading to the achievement of SL’s national interest in IOR

Sri Lanka needs to build awareness, effective policies and encourage regional multilateral frameworks to develop a multi-pronged approach to secure its national interest and safeguard regional stability in the Indian Ocean Region (IOR), as the region together with its seabed have become an area of strategic competition, former Assistant Chief Cabinet Secretary to former Japanese Prime Minister Shinzo Abe, Prof Nobukatsu Kanehara said.

“The Indian Ocean has been a maritime highway for millennia, with Sri Lanka being a midway point of the flow of trade, culture, technology and intellectual progress, Prof Kanehara said at the 4th Pathfinder Foundation Sri Lanka Indian Ocean Security Council Conference held recently at the Cinnamon Grand Hotel. The forum was presided over by Pathfinder Foundation Sri Lanka Chairman Ambassador (retd.) Dr. Bernard Goonetilleke.

The forum’s purpose was to obtain expert commentary regarding the need for Sri Lanka to ‘up its game’ in the IOR.

Abe said that from the 1870s onwards, the Indian Ocean had become the global communications highway, with the British Empire laying submarine cables from Aden to Mumbai, linking Europe to South Asia.

‘Since then, with the passage of time, Ceylon, and later Sri Lanka, has seen the bulk of the global digital communications umbilical laid through its maritime domain of influence, with over a dozen such cables laid over the island’s Exclusive Economic Zone (EEZ) thus far, he said.

Prof. Kanehera added: ” With the rise of Artificial Intelligence (AI) and increasing digitisation, such submarine cables have become critical strategic infrastructure for the island nation as well as the region.

‘This timely conference came as world powers rushed to secure critical minerals needed to maintain a technology edge over rivals, both militarily and economically, disrupting the longstanding rules-based order, especially at sea and in trade.

‘The lack of cognition regarding how to understand and navigate the return to a near Cold War era strategic competition in the Indian Ocean, and increasingly in the sub-surface domain and the seabed, among Sri Lanka’s policy making community, bureaucrats and public leaves the economically weakened island nation more vulnerable to geopolitical coercion, shocks and tug-o-war, which will likely increase in the coming decade.’

Automobile Association of Ceylon donates towards Disaster Relief Support Fund

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.