Stadium For Mandaitivu – A Decision In The Correct Direction

Building of a cricket stadium of international level in Mandaitivu has come under intense scrutiny. Sri Lanka achieved test status in 1981, but so far there is no cricket stadium in Jaffna though there are several in other areas. Western province has Premadasa stadium, Oval and SSC, Southern province has Galle and Suriyawewa, Central province has Pallekele and Dambulla, and north western province has one in Kurunegala. Thus building of a stadium in northern province became a necessity not only to promote cricket but also to ward off the charge of discriminatory practice.

Soon after war ended, the site in Mandaitivu was chosen to bulid this stadium, but work on it never began not much due to logistical or financial constraints but due to political reasons. The present government has rekindled the matter again and foundation stone was laid last November by the incumbent President. Criticism has been raised by environmentalists and vested interests against constructing at this site in order to scuttle the project, without suggesting an alternative. Even under the present government, whether this would see the light of the day is yet to be seen.

To construct an international cricket stadium, you require a large area, to accommodate central turf wicket with about ten strips, 75 yard boundary and space to build the pavilion and also stands around the ground for spectators. Site at Mandaitivu was selected due to its close proximity to Jaffna and is largely unoccupied, which negates the problem of lengthy court trials on acqisition of land from the owners. There are only few other spots available around Jaffna town such as Ariyalai east, Chemmani and Kallundai, but they pose the problem of displacing of occupants.

One problem raised is that of flooding. Recent surge of floods is an unprecedented event and thus it should not be used to assess it. Even other sites around Jaffna also go under water during heavy rains, so Mandaitivu is not alone. Tamil Union ground in Wanathamulla had the same problem of flooding after heavy rain. Engineer Rasiah designed a system of drainage for the ground nearly 80 years ago, which solved the issue. Same could be resorted to for Mandaitivu. Another way is raising ground level by six inches using rocks and soil to prevent water stagnating in the field.

Environmentalists have raised concern about destruction of mangrove plantation around and interference of wetlands used by birds due to the construction of the stadium. Muhurajawela is a mangrove zone, but Katunayake highway has been built over it and some buildings have cropped up on it. If that was allowed why protest about Mandaitivu. Colombo ring road is to be constructed crossing Talangama wetlands and if it is done why not in Mandaitivu. Environmental impact should be weighed against human benefit, and if latter supersedes, project should go ahead.

Mandaitivu could be developed as a modern city with residential and recreational facility. One problem encountered in Mandaitivu is drinking water, which could be solved by commissioning desalination plant to supply homes and shops with pipe borne water. Already a boat club is existing and other water sports could be encouraged using the shallow and placid lagoon around. Beaches in the area need to be developed with prestigious hotels to attract tourists. These are complimentary features to the proposed stadium, and there should be no turning back on the project.