Anura Kumara Dissanayake elected President of Sri Lanka

National People’s Power (NPP) presidential candidate Anura Kumara Dissanayake has been elected as the 9th Executive President of Sri Lanka.

The election commission formally announced on Sunday (September 22) NPP leader Anura Kumara Dissanayake as the winner of the 2024 Presidential Election.

The commission said on its website that Mr. Dissanayake, 55, won the presidency with 42.31% of the vote at Saturday’s (September 21) election, pushing opposition leader Sajith Premadasa to second place and incumbent Ranil Wickremesinghe to a distant third.

It was a strong showing for Dissanayake, who won just over 3% of votes in a previous presidential election in 2019, and suggests voters are fatigued with the old political guard, which has been accused of pushing Sri Lanka toward economic instability.

Mr. Dissanayake is due to be sworn in on Monday (September 23), according to unconfirmed repors.

In a post on ‘X’ (formerly Twitter) after the release of results concluded, Dissanayake said:

“The dream we have nurtured for centuries is finally coming true. This achievement is not the result of any single person’s work, but the collective effort of hundreds of thousands of you. Your commitment has brought us this far, and for that, I am deeply grateful. This victory belongs to all of us.

“Our journey here has been paved by the sacrifices of so many who gave their sweat, tears, and even their lives for this cause. Their sacrifices are not forgotten. We hold the scepter of their hopes and struggles, knowing the responsibility it carries. The millions of eyes filled with hope and expectation push us forward, and together, we stand ready to rewrite Sri Lankan history.

“This dream can only be realized with a fresh start. The unity of Sinhalese, Tamils, Muslims, and all Sri Lankans is the bedrock of this new beginning. The New Renaissance we seek will rise from this shared strength and vision.

“Let us join hands and shape this future together!,” he said.

A record 38 contenders vied for Sri Lanka’s presidency in Saturday’s vote. For the first time in the country’s history, election officials counted the second-preference votes after no candidate secured 50 percent.

The election commission made the announcement after a second vote count, the first in the country’s history.

Opposition leader Sajith Premadasa finished second while incumbent President Ranil Wickremesinghe came third and was eliminated after the first round.

56-year-old Anura Kumar Dissanayake was elected to the office of the president after winning almost eight million votes.

The Marxist Janatha Vimukthi Peramuna (JVP) leader’s campaign was built on sweeping reforms, tackling corruption and ensuring economic relief.

In short, Dissanayake offered a political revolution through the ballot.

Dissanayake hails from Thambuttegama, in the North Central District of Anuradhapura.

In his own words, “an aspirational youth who wanted to change the world.” The son of “working class parents” as he describes himself, Dissanayake attended two public schools in his hometown, and was the first student from Thambuttegama to enter university.

His involvement with student politics saw him join the Janatha Vimukthi Peramuna (JVP) in 1987 and soon he was fully absorbed in JVP politics.

Dissanayake entered the University of Peradeniya but had to leave as threats mounted. In 1992, he got himself transferred to the University of Kelaniya and graduated in 1995 with a Bachelor of Science degree.

Dissanayake has been steadfast in his criticism of cronyism, nepotism, concentration of power and corruption.

In parliament and outside, Dissanayake has been a strong anti-corruption voice demanding accountability.

His promise to overhaul the system, end family rule, introduce financial reforms and improve governance structures resonated with the protesting masses.