CEAT continues to support education of rubber farmers’ children

Donates shoes and school bags to students of four schools in Ratnapura and Elpitiya

Students of four schools in the Ratnapura and Elpitiya areas have received essential requirements such the shoes and school bags they need from CEAT Kelani Holdings under a community project to support the education of children in rubber cultivating regions.

The latest beneficiaries of the programme were the students of Batathota Vidyalaya – Batathota, Mahawatta Kanda Vidyalaya – Batathota and Lassakanda Vidyalaya – Erathna, all in the Kuruwita area of the Ratnapura District, and of Sri Dammathilaka Maha Vidyalaya – Divithura in the Elpitiya area.

A total of 236 children were presented shoes and school bags at these schools by CEAT Kelani, which manufactures half of Sri Lanka’s pneumatic tyre requirements sourcing 100 per cent of its natural rubber needs from local producers that employ 10,000 cultivator families.

Part of the ‘CEAT Cares’ portfolio of good citizenship initiatives, the programme’s first phase focused on the Matugama Educational Zone, and benefitted 119 children from two schools.

Commenting on the programme, CEAT Kelani Chief Operating Officer Mr Shamal Gunawardene said: “As one of the biggest users of Sri Lanka’s rubber in the domestic market, CEAT has always considered rubber cultivators a vital part of its value chain, making their wellbeing an important element of our success. This programme is one community initiative though which we engage and contribute to the quality of life of our rubber farmers and their families.”

CEAT Kelani says it is not the company fined by Customs Department

CEAT’s 7th premium ‘S-I-S’ outlet in Sri Lanka opens in Kurunegala

CEAT Kelani named one of 10 best-managed companies in Sri Lanka by CPM

CEAT invests Rs. 476 mn. in 2.4 MW solar roof panel project in Kelaniya

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.