El Niño : Heavier Maha rains, drier Yala raise food security concerns for Sri Lanka

Colombo, Aug. 20 (Daily Mirror) - Sri Lanka is preparing for a potentially difficult agricultural cycle as changing weather patterns linked to El Niño raise concerns over food security, with heavier-than-usual rainfall expected during the coming Maha season followed by a significantly drier Yala season next year.

The Department of Agriculture is urging farmers to treat the increased rainfall expected during the Maha season as an opportunity to build water reserves for the next Yala, when drought conditions are expected to place greater pressure on agriculture.

“We are expecting more rainfall during the Maha season, but the next Yala is expected to be drier. Therefore, the rainfall we receive during Maha has to be retained for use during the next Yala season,” P. Sisira Kumara, Director of Extension and Training at the Department of Agriculture, said.

The Maha season is expected to receive increased rainfall from late September through October and November this year, and the Department is encouraging farmers to conserve both surface water and soil moisture by constructing small ponds in cultivation areas and adopting farming practices that reduce moisture loss such as burying coconut husks in cultivation lands to help retain moisture in the soil.

The Department is also considering bringing the Maha paddy cultivation forward by around two weeks this year, depending on when rainfall begins. The move is aimed at making maximum use of rainfall for cultivation, while reducing the amount of water drawn from reservoirs, which would enable more water to be carried over into the next Yala season. “If we can make greater use of the Maha rainfall for cultivation, we can conserve more water in the reservoirs and keep that water available for Yala,” he said.

The expected dry condition during the next the Yala season is likely to affect the island as a whole, with usually dry districts such as Jaffna, Trincomalee, Batticaloa, Anuradhapura and Monaragala expected to face greater pressure.

To reduce the impact, the Department is also preparing to promote crop varieties that require less time and water to mature. Short-duration paddy varieties that can be harvested within around two and a half to three months, along with drought-resistant varieties, are being considered for cultivation. The Department is also intending to promote drought-tolerant vegetable varieties and other alternative crops for the next Yala season, in an attempt to reduce water-intensive cultivation while providing additional sources of income to farmers.

Meanwhile, according to P. Sisira Kumara, the increase in heat towards the end of the recent Yala season did not have a major impact on paddy as temperatures began rising after the flowering stage. Vegetables and other crops, however, were affected by the higher temperatures, particularly with the increased heat contributing to a rise in pest problems, forcing farmers to use more pesticides, which inevitably resulted in increased production costs.

These concerns come against an increasing global food-security risk associated with El Niño. The World Food Programme (WFP) has warned that El Niño can produce extreme and contrasting weather conditions, with drought affecting some agricultural regions while others experience flooding. Such weather shocks can damage crops, livestock and agricultural infrastructure, reduce food supplies and disrupt markets. According to WFP analysis, a powerful El Niño could push nearly 49 million additional people into acute food insecurity by the end of next year, taking the number of people facing crisis-level hunger or worse to 274 million across 45 vulnerable countries.