AKD denies NPP was invited to lead Govt. during 2022 political crisis

NPP leader calls on President to uphold dignity of his office when making such claims

Says it is common knowledge NPP was made no offer by Gotabaya or Mahinda Rajapakasa

Accuses President of violating election laws by appointing Manusha and Harin as advisors

Says he is misusing State resources and funds for his election campaign

Slams ECSL for its inability to stop such abuses and take necessary action against it

National People’s Power (NPP) leader and Presidential candidate Anura Kumara Dissanayake has strongly refuted recent claims by President Ranil Wickremesinghe that he was invited to take control of the Government during the 2022 political crisis when Mahinda Rajapaksa and other leaders stepped down.

Addressing a special press conference yesterday Dissanayake stressed that the Presidency should uphold its dignity and responsibility, especially when making such statements. “It’s common knowledge that neither Gotabaya nor Mahinda Rajapaksa ever invited the National People’s Power to form a Government. This doesn’t come as a surprise to us, and frankly, we never anticipated such an invitation,” he remarked.

“They are well aware that if the National People’s Power were to take control, corruption and fraud in this country would be uncovered, and those responsible would face justice,” he asserted.

Directly addresing President Wickre-mesinghe, Dissanayake urged him to carry out his duties with the seriousness that the Presidency requires.

He also called on the people of Sri Lanka to stay alert and take advantage of this unique opportunity to establish a genuine people’s Government.

Dissanayake further pointed out that the appointment of former Ministers Harin Fernando and Manusha Nanayakkara by President Ranil Wickremesinghe as Presidential advisors violates election laws.

He mentioned that the Elections Commission has issued a circular prohibiting new appointments during the election period, and these recent appointments have been made in direct violation of that directive. Dissanayake criticised President Ranil Wickremesinghe for appointing Harin Fernando and Manusha Nanayakkara as advisors to their former Ministries, stating that this allows them to interfere in the operations of these Ministries and enjoy perks and privileges such as access to vehicles and funds. He claimed that the entire United National Party (UNP) camp is being supported by State funds, with UNP members like Akila Viraj, Sagala Ratnayake, Ashu Marasinghe, and others receiving advisory positions, while Navin Dissanayake has been appointed as a Governor. Dissanayake accused the President of misusing State resources and funds for his election campaign, in clear violation of election laws, and criticised the Election Commission for failing to take action against these abuses.

Commenting on his interaction with Sri Lanka Podujana Peramuna (SLPP) Presidential candidate Namal Rajapaksa at the Election Secretariat, NPP leader Anura Kumara Dissanayake described the incident as a routine political encounter, noting that it was more appropriate than refusing a handshake. When asked about their conversation, Dissanayake told the media that nothing significant was discussed.

Dissanayake explained that he simply inquired about Rajapaksa’s well-being and noted that, if he chose, he could have confronted him about his family’s involvement in looting public funds. However, he opted to shake hands as a gesture of goodwill, emphasising that this action had no connection to their political stance, but was merely a routine political interaction.

Dissanayake added that it’s a basic human courtesy to stand up and accept a handshake when offered. “You see how people criticise the incident where the President’s handshake was refused. It was an act of arrogance. What we did was the right thing. Refusing a handshake is wrong,” he said.