Reputations dragged through Diyawanna mud

The JVP-NPP government has met its match in the Bar Association of Sri Lanka (BASL), which has vehemently rejected an allegation recently made by NPP MP Asitha Niroshana Egoda Vithana in Parliament that BASL President Rajeev Amarasuriya has struck a secret deal with Opposition Leader Sajith Premadasa to become the Chief Minister of the Western Province. The BASL has stated that the “utterly false and baseless” allegation has been made with malicious intent. It has expressed deep dismay over the abuse of parliamentary privileges to affront its chief. One cannot but endorse the BASL’s position on the issue.

The BASL has dared MP Vithana to repeat his allegation against Amarasuriya outside Parliament. The government, which obviously got him to say what he said in Parliament should ask him to take up the BASL’s challenge.

Time was when the JVP used its bloodthirsty sparrow units, armed with guns, bombs and swords to suppress dissent. Today, the JVP-led NPP government is using its online smear campaign operatives and other propaganda hitmen to silence its critics. The government’s argument that lawyers are opposing the move to raise the retirement ages of the superior court judges because the BASL chief has cut a deal with the Opposition is tainted by what logicians call the ad hominem fallacy, or carrying out personal attacks against a person rather than countering his or her arguments.

Why the JVP/NPP is so furious as to insult the BASL President is not difficult to understand. The BASL’s arguments against the government’s efforts to increase the retirement ages of the judges of the Court of Appeal and the Supreme Court are valid and backed by some well-known international legal organisations, like LAWASIA and the Commonwealth Lawyers’ Association, and pressure is mounting on the government to deep-six its politically motivated plan.

Those who have rightly taken exception to the aforesaid false allegation against the BASL Chief ought not to lose sight of the bigger picture—the vulnerability of the public vis-a-vis the MPs’ ability to use parliamentary privileges to make slanderous accusations with impunity. Parliamentary privileges are there for legislators to carry out their legislative duties and functions without let or hindrance and not for them to insult others.

The tension between parliamentary privileges and the right to reputation is seen the world over, but the situation has taken a turn for the worse in this country, where legislators are enjoying the freedom of the wild ass to insult others and get off scot-free. Some parliamentary systems have experimented with allowing privileges to be waived in defamation proceedings. For example, the UK introduced a limited waiver mechanism although parliamentary privilege remains a complex constitutional area and the principle that privilege belongs to Parliament rather than an individual member has limited such approaches. There is a need to study such experiments and initiate a public debate on the abuse of parliamentary privileges, with a view to putting in place a constitutional mechanism to prevent reputations from being dragged through the mud in Parliament.

Last week’s parliamentary proceedings got down and dirty, with members of both sides of the House trading insults. A government MP stooped so low as to call an Opposition counterpart a psychiatric patient. The Opposition criticised the Speaker for having used the word, ‘foolish”, to describe the behaviour of one of its members. It said such unparliamentary words must not be used. Sadly, it was not critical of its members’ unparliamentary conduct and personal attacks on the government MPs. One of the Opposition MPs went so far as to question the paternity of a minister, leaving a bad taste in many a mouth. It is unbecoming of legislators to descend to such a low level.

The government and the Opposition ought to hold their unruly, foul-mouthed members on a tight leash lest public confidence in Parliament should erode further. Let them be asked to do unto others as they would have others do unto them.

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.