Opposition’s lack of transparency on amendments to Sri Lanka IMF deal questioned

ECONOMYNEXT — Sri Lanka’s opposition parties that have promised amendments to the government’s agreement with the International Monetary Fund (IMF) upon their election has not revealed the amendments they propose, State Minister of Shehan Semasinghe said.

Semasinghe tweeted Friday March 15 that this apparent lack of transparency is a cause for concern.

“Although the opposition political parties who opposed the International Monetary Fund’s programme, which had a major impact on the recovery and stabilisation of the economy, announced that it would be amended after reaching office. However no indication has been made available on the specific proposed amendments. A clear statement of what the proposed amendments could create a debate about its success or failure, practicality and credibility. But no one yet knows what those amendments are. Why has this happened this way? A concern,” he said.

Both the main opposition Samagi Jana Balawegaya (SJB) and the leftist National People’s Power (NPP) have said on several occasions that they would either renegotiate the agreement or amend it to include terms more favourable to Sri Lanka.

Most recently, the NPP’s economic council met IMF representatives at the Shangri-La Hotel in Colombo on Thursday. Details of the discussion were not revealed to the media apart from comments by NPP members about a question raised on the progress on Sri Lanka’s debt restructuring efforts.

The IMF officials had responded that they were unaware of the details as debt restructuring was not within their ambit and was a matter at the discretion of the government.

Sri Lanka is now on its 17th IMF programme, the latest coming on the heels of the country’s worst financial crisis since Independence. Transport Minister Bandula Gunawardena said on Wednesday that Sri Lanka violated all 16 of its past agreeents  and if the current deal is also not honoured, the situation could get macabre.

Sri Lanka failed 16 IMF agreements, latest deal must be honoured: ministerSee more