Sri Lanka cancels parliament debt debate amid criticism, leader’s death

ECONOMYNEXT – Sri Lanka government has cancelled a two-day parliament debate on the recently concluded bilateral debt restructuring after the opposition criticized that the restructuring deal are far from over and death of a former opposition leader.

The debate was scheduled for Tuesday (02) and Wednesday (03) while a vote on the debt restructuring deal was to be held at the end of the debate on Wednesday.

President Ranil Wickremesinghe’s government reached US$10 billion worth bilateral debt deal with the members of Paris Club as well as China last week.

Both opposition leader Sajith Premadasa and leftist National People’s Power (NPP) leader Anura Kumara Dissanayake have dismissed the announcement of Sri Lanka’s debt deferment agreement with bilateral creditors, pointing instead to negotiations still ongoing with commercial creditors.

“The debate and the vote on the bilateral debt restructuring are likely to be rescheduled when the parliament sessions starts on July 9,” a source who was the knowledge on the party leaders’ meeting over the cancellation of the debate told EconomyNext.

The remains of former opposition leader Rajavarothiyam Sampanthan is scheduled to be kept in the parliament on Wednesday, the source said.

Sampanthan, an ethnic Tamil leader and former opposition leader passed away on Sunday. The lawmaker who entered the parliament in 1977 was a moderate leader who preached for coexistence with other ethnicities during the minority group’s campaign for autonomy amid a separatist war. He was 91.

“There is an opposition criticism that they still have not got the whole documents on the debt restructuring deal.”

Instead of the debate, President Wickremesinghe is expected to address the parliament, the source said.

The latest deal with the bilateral creditors is crucial for the island nation to resume a raft of infrastructure projects that have been suspended after the declaration of bankruptcy in April 2022.

Cabinet Spokesman Bandula Gunawardena on Monday (01) said a committee has been appointed to look into the revisions of the contracts related to all suspended projects funded by bilateral creditors. (Colombo/July 01/2024)