Virtusa achieves Science Based Targets Initiative validation for Greenhouse gas emissions reduction targets

Virtusa Corporation, a global provider of digital strategy, digital engineering, and IT services and solutions, recently received validation from the Science Based Targets initiative (SBTi) for its greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions reduction targets. These validations cover Virtusa’s Scope 1, 2, and 3 GHG emissions reduction targets, both near-term and long-term, underscoring Virtusa’s commitment to reducing its carbon footprint across all areas of its operations and value chain.

“Climate science demands rapid, deep emissions cuts to achieve global net-zero and prevent the devastating impacts of climate change,” said Susan Jenny Ehr, Interim Chief Executive Officer of the Science Based Targets initiative. “Virtusa’s net-zero targets reflect this urgency and set a clear example for its peers to follow.”

Santosh Thomas, CEO of Virtusa, commented, “We are immensely proud to have our ambitious GHG emissions reduction targets validated by the Science Based Targets initiative alongside leading organizations who are committed to a net-zero future. Sustainability is a core pillar of our corporate strategy, and achieving these validations is a testament to our ambition to lead by example in the fight against climate change. We will continue to work diligently towards our sustainability goals, driving innovation while reducing our environmental footprint.”

The Science Based Targets initiative (SBTi) is a corporate climate action organization that enables companies to set greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions reductions targets in order to reach net-zero latest by 2050. The SBTi is a partnership between the Carbon Disclosure Project (CDP), the United Nations Global Compact, the We Mean Business Coalition, the World Resources Institute (WRI), and the World Wide Fund for Nature (WWF).

By aligning its targets with the SBTi’s rigorous criteria, Virtusa aims not only to mitigate climate risks but also to leverage sustainable practices that support long-term business resilience.

NCE calls for urgent action to address visa and passport crisis impacting business community

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.