People’s Bank unveils ‘A Gallery in the Bank’ documentary

Presentation of tokens of appreciation to Ismeth Raheem and Nadine David.

Presentation of tokens of appreciation to Senaka Senanayake and  B.Wimalaratne.

People’s Bank recently held the special screening of ‘A Gallery in the Bank’ – Priceless Treasures of People’s Bank, a documentary that showcases the unique and culturally significant artworks displayed at the lobbies of the Bank’s Old and New Head Office Buildings in Colombo 02. The screening was held at People’s Tower, the Bank’s new Head Office in Colombo 02.

The documentary explores 12 rare and remarkable works of art from the People’s Bank collection, uncovering the stories behind each masterpiece, their historical significance, artistic value, and the enduring legacy they represent. Through this production, the Bank has taken a significant step towards documenting and preserving a valuable part of Sri Lanka’s artistic heritage.

Created by some of Sri Lanka’s most celebrated artists, including George Keyt, Pushpananda Weerasinghe, Senaka Senanayake, Wimal de Silva, Jayantha Premachandra, Nadine David, Yasantha Boange, B. Wimalaratne, Richard Gabriel, Upasiri and Ismeth Raheem, these extraordinary artworks reflect the richness and diversity of Sri Lanka’s cultural identity.

These masterpieces form an irreplaceable part of the nation’s artistic legacy, standing as silent witnesses to an important era in Sri Lanka’s history. The documentary aims to preserve these invaluable creations for future generations while introducing this hidden treasure within People’s Bank to a wider audience. It celebrates the vision and creativity of the artists while highlighting People’s Bank’s commitment to safeguarding and promoting the country’s cultural heritage.

The documentary was presented and researched by Angeline Ondaatjie, while SulochanaPeiris served as the Director. Their contribution has brought together the historical, artistic and cultural narratives behind these exceptional creations, creating a valuable record of the Bank’s unique art collection.

A special highlight of the event was the presentation of tokens of appreciation to four living artists featured in the documentary — Ismeth Raheem, Nadine David, Senaka Senanayake and B. Wimalaratne — in recognition of their outstanding contribution to Sri Lankan art and culture.

Among these distinguished artists, B. Wimalaratne holds a special place in the People’s Bank collection, as he is the only artist featured in the documentary who also served as an employee of People’s Bank.

The event was attended by People’s Bank Chairman Prof. Narada Fernando, Chief Executive Officer/General Manager Clive Fonseka, members of the Board of Directors, Corporate and Executive Management, distinguished guests, artists and art enthusiasts.