SEC, CSE  to host ‘Invest Sri Lanka’ forum from 17-20 Aug. in Australia

The Securities and Exchange Commission of Sri Lanka (SEC), Colombo Stock Exchange (CSE), and the stock broking industry are conducting a series of ‘Invest Sri Lanka’ investor forums in Australia, with multiple forums to be held in Melbourne and Sydney. The forums will be held in Sydney and Melbourne from 17 August 2026 to 20 August 2026.

The ‘Invest Sri Lanka’ Investor Forum – Australia 2026 follows the ‘Invest Sri Lanka’ Investor Forums held in Dubai and Riyadh earlier in January.  Capitalising  on the growth and stability achieved in the Sri Lankan capital market in 2025, the ‘Invest Sri Lanka’ investor forums of 2026 are set to leverage on Sri Lanka’s status as an attractive frontier market and will seek to attract institutional investors and the Sri Lankan diaspora.

The SEC and CSE will be returning to Australia after nearly nine years following the last ‘Invest Sri Lanka’ Investor Forum Australia conducted in 2017. The 2017 roadshow played an important role in strengthening investor awareness of Sri Lanka among investors in Australia, with buy turnover rising over 700% from Rs. 72.9 million to Rs. 603.8 million within the six-month window following the forums.

As of the end of 2025 buy turnover has risen to Rs. 1.85 billion with Australia emerging as one of the top 10 sources of foreign investor inflows into the Sri Lankan capital market, and as one of the top 10 sources of remittance inflows from the growing Sri Lankan diaspora in Australia.  With the strong rise in Sri Lanka’s All-Share-Price-Index (ASPI) over the past 10 years, a rising number of Sri Lankan diaspora investors have taken an interest in the Sri Lankan stock market.

The forums will be conducted amidst a remarkable six-year growth in the capital market which saw the ASPI rise from 4,846 points in May 2020 to 22,310.80 points by the end of May 2026. This represents a growth of 360% and a compound annual growth rate (CAGR) of approximately 28.98%. Furthermore, Sri Lanka’s equity market stands above regional competitors with a market Price-to-Earnings (P/E) ratio of 11.20 x, enjoying Asia’s 2nd lowest (P/E) Ratio, offering strong upside potential for investors seeking frontier market exposure.

SEC Chairman Senior Prof. D.B.P.H. Dissabandara said: “Sri Lanka is strengthening its capital market through robust regulation, greater transparency and stronger investor protection, creating a more trusted and resilient environment for investors. We invite Australian investors to explore the opportunities emerging in our market.”

High-level government officials, regulators, listed companies, leading stock brokering firms, and international investors will convene at the forum to foster connections and promote long-term capital flows into Sri Lanka. CSE Vice President – Marketing Niroshan Wijesundere commented that there is strong interest in the forums, with registrations for several sessions already exceeding capacity.

CHEC Port City Colombo is participating in the Invest Sri Lanka Investor Forums in Australia as a collaborative partner, joining the SEC and the CSE in bringing Sri Lanka’s investment proposition to Australian investors and businesses.

CHEC Port City Colombo Ltd., Managing Director Xiong Hongfeng said:  “Australia represents a significant market for Sri Lanka, and this forum provides a timely platform to engage directly with investors who are well-positioned to recognise the opportunity. We look forward to sharing what Port City Colombo has to offer as part of Sri Lanka’s broader investment story.”

The Board of Investment of Sri Lanka will also be participating in the forums, further strengthening the representation of key stakeholders driving the country’s investment and economic development agenda. Joining as the platinum sponsor, the Hatton National Bank (HNB) Group will be supporting the forums as the forums facilitate engagement between investors, businesses, and industry leaders.

Speakers and panellists at the events include Industry and Entrepreneurship Development Deputy Minister Chathuranga Abeysinghe, Central Bank Governor Dr. P. Nandalal Weerasinghe, Sri Lanka High Commissioner to Australia Yasoja Gunesekara, Securities and Exchange Commission of Sri Lanka Chairman Senior Prof. D.B.P.H. Dissabandara, Colombo Stock Exchange (CSE) Director Ray Abeywardena, Board of Investment of Sri Lanka Director General Dr. Sulakshana Jayawardena, Sri Lanka Consul General to Victoria, South Australia and Tasmania Pradeepa Saram, CSE CEO Rajeeva Bandaranaike, Lynear Wealth Management Co-Founder and Managing Director Dr. Naveen Gunawardane, ACP Corum Pty Ltd. Executive Director Charles Blake, Hatton National Bank PLC Managing Director and CEO Damith Pallewatte, and CHEC Port City Colombo Ltd. Deputy Managing Director Thulci Aluwihare. They will take part in a series of panel discussions and presentations focusing on Sri Lanka’s economic reforms, financial stability and capital market potential.

Registered participants will get the opportunity to access to a series of sessions offering in-depth insights into Sri Lanka’s capital markets, economic outlook and investment opportunities. The program will also feature a high-level panel discussion, featuring leaders and market experts who will share their perspectives on macroeconomic trends, market performance, and future growth opportunities. The forum will highlight the resilience and potential of the market, showcasing recent policy reforms, improved infrastructure, and a robust ecosystem that supports sustainable investment.