Sri Lanka, Netherlands conclude second round of political consultations

The second round of political consultations between the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka and the Kingdom of the Netherlands took place in The Hague, on Wednesday.

The Dutch delegation was led by the Director of the Asia and Oceania Department of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the Netherlands, Dominique Kuhling, while the Sri Lankan delegation was led by the Ministry of Foreign Affairs Europe and North America Division Director-General Sugeeshwara Gunaratna.

The meeting was held in a spirit of the longstanding friendship, mutual respect and cooperation, and shared values. Whilst reaffirming the commitment to the bilateral relationship, both delegations reviewed the full spectrum of the ongoing cooperation and emphasised the need for a renewed focus, amongst others, on maritime and cultural cooperation, as both countries look ahead to celebrating 75 years of diplomatic relations in 2026. Both sides discussed ways and means of marking the 75th anniversary of diplomatic relations in a fitting manner.

The two delegations welcomed the ongoing cultural collaboration as a cornerstone of the relationship. The Sri Lanka side appreciated the commitment of the Netherlands to addressing historical legacies through the respectful return of items of cultural heritage. The ongoing Dutch-Sri Lanka collaboration between the National Archives of the Netherlands and the National Archives of Sri Lanka to conserve, restore, and digitise the archives currently deposited at the Sri Lanka Archives, was welcomed by both sides.

The two sides reviewed the current level of trade, investment, and tourism ties between the two countries and explored new opportunities for economic cooperation emphasising the need to explore greater collaboration between the relevant trade chambers. The Sri Lankan side noted that currently, the Netherlands is among the top 10 source markets for tourism and outlined the attractions Sri Lanka offers as a tourist destination, as well as the opportunities available for investment in tourism infrastructure.

Discussions emphasised the importance of collaboration in areas such as port development and maritime safety, highlighting the long-term technical and commercial partnerships that the Sri Lanka Ports Authority has maintained with Dutch institutions.

The two sides also discussed regional and international developments and cooperation at multilateral institutions, as well as possible support for each other’s candidacies within the United Nations system. Further, both sides underscored their commitment to maintaining regional stability and maritime security through, amongst others, initiatives such as BIMSTEC and IORA.

The meeting reaffirmed the importance of continued dialogue between Sri Lanka and the Netherlands, including periodical consultations. Both sides agreed to convene the next meeting at a mutually convenient time to assess progress and further strengthen the partnership.

The Sri Lanka delegation comprised Ambassador of Sri Lanka to the Netherlands Rekha Gunasekera, the National Archives of Sri Lanka Director-General Dr. Nadeera Rupesinghe, Sri Lanka Embassy in The Hague First Secretary Sashiprabha Wijeratne, and Ministry of Foreign Affairs Assistant Director Kaumadie Wijesinghe.

The Netherlands delegation consisted of the Policy Coordinator for Cultural Development of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the Netherlands, two Sri Lanka Desk Officers of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the Netherlands and a Consular Officer from the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the Netherlands.