Microsoft Sri Lanka empowers McLarens Group to forge ahead in tech innovation

The McLarens Group, one of Sri Lanka’s largest diversified conglomerates, propels forward with Microsoft Sri Lanka, as the organization transitions from Business Productivity Suite to Microsoft Enterprise Product Services. This adoption underscores the firm’s unwavering trust and steadfast commitment to technological advancement and will support in strengthening the operations of McLarens Group.

The decision to expand McLarens Group’s usage of Microsoft’s cutting-edge technology was driven by their confidence in state-of-the-art solutions. Recognizing the significance of a unified platform spanning across its diverse sectors, McLarens Group now seamlessly operates, ensuring technological accessibility and a collaborative environment.

“With trust in Microsoft Sri Lanka’s reliability and innovation, I am eager for McLarens Group to continue our journey and experience this cultural shift towards technology-driven decision making. For instance, by adopting Microsoft Enterprise Productivity Suite, through tools like Microsoft Teams, we have been able to reduce our telecommunication costs, and our staff is now able to connect from anywhere, at any time. This has enabled us to foster seamless communication in a faster, simpler, and smarter way and, ultimately, foster innovation,” commented Ravi Edirisinghe, Group Chief Commercial Officer of McLarens Group.

McLarens Group’s vision of technology as the bedrock of progress has not only mitigated staff resistance but has ignited a culture where innovation thrives and propels the company towards unparalleled success. Through comprehensive online and offline sessions conducted by a Microsoft Partner, McLarens Group has ensured a smooth onboarding process for their employees.

Speaking on the adoption, Harsha Randeny, Country Manager for Microsoft Sri Lanka and Maldives, said, “We are glad that McLarens Group has continued their trust in us and made the transforming decision of facilitating connectivity, collaboration, innovation and security across sectors by adopting Microsoft Technologies. By deploying solutions with ease, fortified by robust security features, we are keen to support McLarens Group to further solidify their tech-driven approach to streamlined processes and digital transformation.”

This integration by McLarens Group has been a seamless pursuit, stimulating productivity and elevating security to an enterprise level. Looking ahead, McLarens Group aims to delve deeper into Microsoft’s suite of products by adopting Microsoft Security measures with Microsoft Defender, unlocking the potential for driving change through technology driven by AI.

Three regional telecom players show interest in SLT shares as latter appreciate

Microsoft celebrates 2023 Partner Award winners from Sri Lanka and Maldives

Microsoft Sri Lanka brings AI-powered productivity to Brandix with Copilot for Microsoft 365

Microsoft Sri Lanka leads the way in harnessing AI for business transformation

Microsoft Sri Lanka signs on as Gold Partner for FITIS Sri Lanka Internet Day 2022

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.