Lies and hypocrisy

The budget season is now on. But during the so-called annual budget debates, the budget itself often ends up an also-ran, with the members of both sides of the Houses devoting most of their time to raising unrelated issues and trading barbs. This shows that partisan politics, which takes precedence over economics, is the bane of this country.

On Monday, while taking part in the budget debate, SJB MP Sujeewa Senasinghe launched into a tirade against Minister Wasantha Samarasinghe, when the latter said the former had authored a booklet during the Yahapalana government, defending the Treasury bond scammers. Speaker Dr. Jagath Wickramaratne was caught in the crossfire. Senasinghe, who was picking holes in the budget, was distracted. So was the House. Why can’t the MPs remain intensely focused on the ailing economy at least during the budget debate?

While watching parliamentary proceedings, one is often reminded of Yuval Noah Harari’s multi-million copy best seller, Sapiens: A Brief History of Humankind, especially the chapter on the post-Cognitive Revolution era. In comparing the gatherings of apes to those of Homo Sapiens, Harari argues that one on one or ten on ten, humans are embarrassingly similar to chimpanzees. ‘Significant differences begin to appear only when we cross the threshold of 150 individuals, and when we reach 1,000-2,000 the differences become astounding’. Homo Sapiens in large numbers, he says, create orderly patterns, such as political institutions. Yet going by the chaotic sessions of Sri Lanka’s 225-member Parliament, one wonders whether Harari’s argument might work in reverse in favour of the Chimpanzees. (Speaker Wickramaratne has ordered a probe into the increasing use of unparliamentary language during debates.)

Be that as it may, what we witnessed on Monday in Parliament was an instance of the pot calling the kettle black. Senasinghe’s booklet at issue was an abortive attempt to deny that there had been irregularities in the Treasury bond transactions in question. A UNP MP at the time, Senasinghe defended the then Prime Minister Ranil Wickremesinghe, who shielded Central Bank Governor Arjuna Mahendran involved in the scam. The JVP also made a similar attempt to help Wickremesinghe clear his name. Wickremesinghe has claimed that the Committee on Public Enterprises (COPE) which probed the Treasury bond scams did not hold him accountable for the scams in question. The COPE was headed by JVP MP Sunil Handunnetti at that time, and the Yahapalana members thereof went out of their way to defend the bond scammers and Wickremesinghe. They sought to dilute the COPE report with a slew of footnotes. So, the JVP is as guilty as those shameless Yahapalana MPs, some of whom are currently in the SJB, pontificating to the NPP government on the virtues of good governance! Ironically, the JVP and the UNP were together on an anti-corruption campaign during the Yahapalana regime.

The JVP would have the public believe that it is all out to bring back former Central Bank Governor Mahendran from Singapore to stand trial for the Treasury bond scams, and make Wickremesinghe face legal action over grave human right abuses committed by some counterterror units during the JVP’s reign of terror in the late 1980s. But it defended Wickremesinghe to the hilt during the UNP-led Yahapalana government. If not for the JVP’s support, beleaguered PM Wickremesinghe’s hold on power would have come to an end in October 2018, when President Sirisena appointed Mahinda Rajapaksa as the Prime Minister. The JVP fought a successful legal battle against Sirisena’s action, and enabled Wickremesinghe to muster a working majority in Parliament and retain the premiership.

The JVP had no qualms about supporting Wickremesinghe, whose scalp it is now after, claiming that he was involved in the Batalanda torture chambers in the late 1980s. Today, the estranged Yahapalana partners are at war, but they will not go so far as to try to destroy each other, for they know such a course of action would lead to mutually assured destruction, given the secrets they share from the past.

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.