Local artistes lack creativeness

Our music scene has been around for a very, very long time, but what have our performers achieved globally. Absolutely nothing!

Have any of them had their creations zoom into the international charts? And when I say international charts, I mean charts that provide insights into global music trends and popularity.

It hasn’t happened and I would put it down to lack of creativeness.

The modern K-pop industry began to take shape in the 1990s and is now a global phenomenon, with a vast and dedicated fan base.

South Korean artistes have entered international music charts, with prominent examples including BTS, who topped the Billboard Global 200 and the Hot 100 with their single ‘Dynamite’ and have multiple chart-topping albums, and BLACKPINK.

Other artistes, such as PSY, achieved global recognition with ‘Gangnam Style,’ while Jimin (of BTS) made history as the first solo K-pop artiste to reach No. 1 on the Hot 100 with ‘Like Crazy,’ and Jung Kook (also of BTS) had a No. 1 debut with ‘Seven.’

Soloists like Rosé, and groups like Stray Kids, Seventeen, Tomorrow X Together (TXT), and NewJeans, have also charted on the IFPI Global Artiste Chart and the Billboard Hot 100.

Before long, we may even see performers from India, too, making headway in the international music scene.

The ‘Perfect’ singer Ed Sheeran spent a month in India, early this year, filming his music video ‘Sapphire.’ which features Arijit Singh and a cameo by Shah Rukh Khan.

Referring to his collaboration with Arijit Singh on ‘Sapphire’, he said it was one of the most memorable experiences in his musical career …  and ‘Sapphire’ peaked at No. 5 on the UK singles chart.

The Fabulous Echoes with Cliff Foenander– back row, extreme right

Ed spent a month in India to film the track, which is part of his eighth studio album ‘Play’, and was spotted taking auto rides, exploring the streets with Arijit, in his hometown of West Bengal, and even performing on the streets of Hyderabad.

He was full of praise for the country and described his trip to India and collaboration with Arijit as the “most amazing days in my musical career.”

Arijit Singh, by the way, is an Indian playback singer, composer, music producer and instrumentalist.

Well, this is a clear indication that collaborations with international artistes, or producers, is also an essential requirement for our performers to get global exposure … yes, for international listeners to discover our talent, but I don’t see it happening.

We seem to be quite happy catering only to Sri Lankan audiences, and the new trend, I’ve noticed, is for our artistes to show their dancing skills, especially on social media (TikTok), and not their singing capabilities..

The late Cliff Foenander, from Sri Lanka, achieved international fame when he joined the Hong Kong-based group The Fabulous Echoes, as their lead singer.

The group had a massive hit with ‘A Little Bit of Soap’ in 1964, which spent 25 weeks at number one in the Hong Kong charts and became a huge success in Southeast Asia.

According to reports, Cliff Foenander performed in Las Vegas, in the States, sharing the stage with legendary artistes like Frank Sinatra, Dean Martin, Sammy Davis Jr., Louis Armstrong, and Ella Fitzgerald.

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.