New Anthoney’s Group signs pledge to combat Antimicrobial Resistance during World AMR Awareness Week

Reassuring its commitment toward a healthier nation and advocating for an antibiotic-free poultry industry in Sri Lanka, New Anthoney’s Group, has signed an official pledge in view of World Antimicrobial Resistance Awareness Week (WAAW) held from 18-24 November.

The event took place at the group’s Hanwella-based HQ on 19 November, with the participation of some of its key customers, partners, health-sector professionals, the board and staffs. The group’s managing director Mr. Emil Stanley gave an opening speech, followed by an insightful series of presentations, including Dr. Kishani Dinapala as key resource person representing WHO Sri Lanka, on the importance of AMR.

This comes as part of a series of WAAW-focused activities by New Anthoney’s Group, aiming to inspire collective action against AMR and promote the “One Health” approach, which integrates human, animal, and environmental health practices.

New Anthoney’s, one of the leaders well reputed for their ethical and sustainable practices, has been pursuing antibiotic-free policy for over five years and takes great pride in being the only chicken producer in the country in doing so. New Anthoney’s pledge towards this has always been to continuously and consistently have an antibiotic-free production, and this among various other efforts has earned a distinctive reputation of being the safest chicken producer in Sri Lanka.

The company has long stood for fighting antimicrobial resistance (AMR) throughout its entire operations, prioritizing an all-natural poultry production, adhering to stringent biosecurity and animal welfare practices that meet the standards of the National Chicken Council, USA.

New Anthoney’s “Green Commandments” highlights a dedication to sustainability across all stages, from farm-to-fork, with strict adherence to antibiotic-free practices, ensuring consumers receive high-quality, safe poultry products. The use of biodegradable packaging to reduce waste and minimize impact on ecosystems, monitor and manage greenhouse gas emissions in compliance with ISO standards contributing to lower carbon footprints, sourcing sustainable U.S. Soy are a few of its many efforts towards this.

Assured antibiotic-free, its range of products contribute to addressing protein malnutrition in Sri Lanka, providing a high-nutrient food source to communities across the country. By pledging to WAAW’s “Educate. Advocate. Act now” theme, the group also held various other activities such as employee engagement, a workshop at the University of Peradeniya, and an awareness session at a local school where it also donated a water purification system.

Suwa Diviya ‘Live Well Health Fair’ brings health and wellness to Colombo

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.