‘Buddha Rashmi’ Vesak festival returns in grandeur from 23-26 May

The ‘Buddha Rashmi’ Vesak festival, organised by the Colombo Gangarama Temple in collaboration with the Presidential Secretariat, the Prime Minister’s Office and the MahaKaruna Buddhist Association of Singapore, is set to take place from 23 to 26 May.

This year’s festival, themed “Attano wa avekkhyeya kathani akatani cha” (Let’s focus on what we have done, not what others have done), is set to be a vibrant and enlightening event to reflect on the teachings of Lord Buddha.

The festivities will span across three major venues: the Presidential Secretariat premises, Shangri-La Green Ground, and Gangarama Temple.

Key highlights include a Giant Vesak Pandal, Vesak Lanterns Exhibition, Bakthi Gee (devotional songs), Vesak dansal (almsgiving stalls), Thovil and Devolmadu (traditional healing rituals), Shantikarma (peace rituals), flower parades, meditation programs, Viridu recitals, lighting decorations and various cultural events. Special Rice dansal and Biscuit - Tea dansal will be available to the public on 23,24 and 25 May from 7:00 p.m. near the Presidential Secretariat.  Additionally, Bakthi Gee recitals will take place each evening at the Presidential Secretariat premises, Shangri-La Green Grounds and the Vesak Zone near Gangarama Temple. These recitals will feature troupes from the Sri Lanka Navy, Army, Air Force, Civil Security Department (CSD) and Police.

A central attraction will be the Vesak Pandal depicting the ‘Chulla Dharmapala Jataka’, accompanied by spectacular lanterns, displayed near Baladaksha Mawatha and Beira Lake area.

President Ranil Wickremesinghe will inaugurate this display at 7:30 p.m. on 23 May. Another notable Pandal illustrating the ‘Magha Manavaka Jataka’ will be showcased near the Gangarama Temple throughout the above dates.

In addition to these visual and musical displays, a ‘Mindfulness’ meditation program will be held today at 7:30 a.m. at Independence Square. This session will see the participation of 500 representatives from schools, universities, international schools and technical colleges, reflecting the festival’s emphasis on inner reflection and spiritual growth.

The ‘Buddha Rashmi’ Vesak festival is likely to draw thousands of people and visitors to reflect on the teachings of Lord Buddha.