Sri Lanka’s teachers must be disciplined: President

ECONOMYNEXT – Strikes by teachers are detrimental and unjustified, and the Attorney General has been asked to propose counter-measures, Sri Lanka’s President Ranil Wickremesinghe has said.

“No one, whether directly or indirectly, should disrupt school education from 7:30 am to 1:30 pm. I have requested the Attorney General to propose measures regarding this issue,” Wickremesinghe said at a ceremony at Temple Trees on Wednesday.

“Moving forward, we will take stronger measures on this front, even if it may provoke dissent,” the president said while awarding appointments to officers of the Education Administrative Service, and teaching appointments to graduates and diploma holders.

“It is imperative that the education of children is not hindered by school closures or strikes.”

Some teacher and principal trade unions are demanding a revision and additional salary increases, “which is surprising considering teachers have already received two salary increments.”

In 2022, under President Gotabaya Rajapaksa’s administration, the only salary increase was for teachers, Wickremesinghe said. “This year, we provided a stipend of Rs. 10,000 for all government employees.”

Given the country’s economic situation, further increases were not feasible, Wickremesinghe, a one-time Education  Minister, said.

“Education in a country cannot be maintained without discipline… If we do not protect the country’s education system and allow it to be disrupted, we will lose our future generation.”

He said this situation did not occur in Tamil and Muslim schools, or international schools and private schools, where educational activities continued.

“Sinhala-medium schools had to face disruptions. Children from rural areas attend these schools. Teachers of Tamil and Muslim schools recognized the importance of education.”

He said some teachers faced threats preventing them from attending.

“Our future is our children. That is why the government is committed to equipping the next generation with new knowledge and modern technology in a changing world.”

Even when the country faced bankruptcy in the past two years, and as we took steps to recover, funding for education was increased, he pointed out.

“Everyone entering this honourable profession should dedicate their service to the future generation and must be disciplined.”

While protests are not new to Sri Lanka, the most recent strike was entirely different, Wickremesinghe said and “do not befit the honourable teaching profession.” (Colombo/Jul3/2024)