Govt. failures and insidious attempts to intimidate judicial processes

It has been around 19 months since the present Government was elected into power. To be perfectly frank, the present National People’s Power (NPP) Government has failed to keep many of its pre-election promises. Its biggest failure has been its inability to reign in the sky-rocketing cost of living and provide poorer sections of the community sufficient economic relief.

Similarly it failed to renegotiate the IMF bail-out package. An agreement negotiated during the Presidency of Ranil Wickremesinghe which placed many burdens on the poorer sections of the community. The NPP had promised to renegotiate the document.

Despite large sections of the people facing near starvation conditions, the people have not taken to the streets to protest government’s failures. Perhaps this is because they realise, these problems were caused by misdeeds of past regimes and could NOT be solved overnight. In its pre-election manifesto our present rulers also promised a system change where irrespective of position or power all people would be held equal before the law. They promised a crackdown on organised crime and strict implementation of an anti-corruption programme.

In this field, the Government has been successful to an extent. It has had partial success in combating and to an extent broken the nexus between underworld gangs and powerful political leaders. It also successfully captured a large number of powerful underworld gang figures and incarcerated them. Many of these criminal elements were directing criminal activities here, while based abroad.

Many of these gangs and their leadership are involved in the narcotics trade. Intra-gang broke out country-wide over control of territory. Killings and shootings were carried out in broad daylight. The forces of law and order stood by idly as gang bosses were closely associated with powerful politicians.

The present regime has successfully controlled the menace to an extent.

The war on corruption is now taking its toll on corrupt politicians. One of the core promises of the NPP was ending the culture of impunity and corruption by investigating past misdeeds and ensuring accountability. It also promised to restore the independence of the Judiciary, strengthen state institutions and eradicate interference to the Judiciary.

Since the NPP Government came into power, two former ministers have been sentenced to terms in prison. The immediate past president has been charged with corrupt practice, was held in remand custody and is now out on bail. The Commission to Investigate Allegations of Bribery or Corruption (CIABOC) announced another four former Cabinet ministers and two former State ministers are expected to be indicted in the Colombo High Court on bribery charges.

CIABOC has also initiated an investigation into the alleged suspected illegal assets of six sitting ministers of the current NPP regime under the Money Laundering Act.   Days ago - on12 May 2026 - CIABOC summoned former President Mahinda Rajapaksa to appear before the Commission to record a statement regarding an alleged US$ 2 million bribe linked to the 2013 procurement of Airbus aircraft for SriLankan Airlines.

Then, all hell broke out. ‘Unknown persons’ organised a huge demonstration of vociferous ‘Mahinda supporters’ outside the CIABOC office to demonstrate solidarity with the past president and against the investigating body. An act clearly attempting to intimidate judicial processes and investigations.

It brings to mind a similar incident where on June 11, 1983, during late J.R. Jayewardene’s Presidency. After Court held against government in a case filed by Vivienne Goonerwardene, and her husband, against wrongful arrest and degrading treatment by the Kollupitiya Police, a large mob arrived and staged noisy protests outside the residences of the Supreme Court Justices who adjudicated against government in the said case.

Police guarding the Justices residences disappeared. Phone calls by the Judges to Emergency Lines at Police HQ seemed to have gone dead!  The aim was clearly to intimidate the Judiciary and processes of Justice.

The ‘Mahinda solidarity’ demonstration in front of the CIABOC office can only be seen as a similar attempt to intimidate judicial processes. Ordinary people have not taken to the streets against the rising cost of living. It is unlikely they will suddenly come out in numbers to protest investigations into a person they themselves threw out for alleged corrupt practice.

The presence of organised crowds at Rajapaksa’s hearing proves the old hooligan culture is not completely wiped out and is looking for an opportunity to raise its head.

‘Your Thought’ is a space, a right of the readers to support or contradict and discuss the issues highlighted in the editorial and other articles in the editorial and op-ed pages. Designed as the reader’s editorial; our readers can send in their writings, with a word count not exceeding 200, to ‘Your Thought’, Daily Mirror Political Features Desk, No 8, Hunupitiya Cross Road, Colombo 2 or email to [email protected]