Chinese construction company Zhong Wei upbeat about SL growth prospects, opens office in Colombo

Zhong Wei International Corporation, one of the leading design and construction companies in China, has opened its office in Colombo under the name Zhong Wei Engineering Consulting Company Ltd., and has begun to engage with key stakeholders in the country, to explore the prospects of providing its services as the country’s recovery process is on track to start mega projects in the near future.

Chairman of the company, Luo Xiaolan said that they are keen to involve in mega development projects in the Colombo Port City, Hambantota Port, Expressway Network and are also looking at investing in power generation projects.

“Sri Lanka and China have maintained close bilateral relations over several centuries. In recent times China has been a key player in providing infrastructure to the government while several Chinese companies have invested in Sri Lanka. Our parent company was set up in 2009 in China and it has been expanding its global presence with sizable investments in Hong Kong, Cambodia, Macau, Myanmar, Mozambique and Indonesia. In fact, we had plans to enter Sri Lanka a few years ago, but the economic crisis delayed it,” she said.

“With Sri Lanka recovering faster than expected, we have decided to enter Sri Lanka. To facilitate our work, we have formed a joint venture company with Sri Wing Lanka Pvt. Ltd and have opened our office here.”

“We are specialised in providing engineering consultancy services and a full range of cost management services with our experience in world class construction projects. Zhong Wei International Corporation’s delivered projects include a 4-kilometer under sea road network in Hong Kong and more than 60 high-rise apartment buildings/ office complexes in China and other countries.”

“Zhongwei also has participated in over 30 national, provincial, and municipal-level industry standard formulation and research projects, and has been recognised as the preferred consulting firm by the Guangdong Provincial Government’s audit repository while repeatedly receiving public commendation from industry regulators. Today, we are a company with more than USD 500 million in revenue annually.”

“We have completed a fact finding mission in Sri Lanka involving both public and private sectors in line with our services, and the potential opportunities stemming from it are very encouraging. We will further evaluate the proposals we have received, and will be coming back to Sri Lanka in two months for follow-up action.”

Ms. Xiaolan said that in a bid to broaden the horizons of Sri Lankan youths in Engineering Management Services, her company is planning to offer about 50 fully-funded scholarships to study in leading Chinese universities.

W. T. N. Indunil, Director at Zhong Wei Engineering Consulting Company Ltd in Colombo said that the awarding of scholarships to selected Sri Lankan students will be done through Sri Win Lanka Pvt Ltd where he is the chairman and which is also the coordinating arm for Zhong Wei in Sri Lanka.”

Backed by a global perspective and profound cross-border project consulting expertise, Zhong Wei has successfully provided top-notch consultancy services for several Guangdong-Macao cooperative construction projects.

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.