Navigating stability towards dynamic growth – 1

Sustaining Reform Momentum for a Strong Recovery: Impact of Geopolitics

We the citizens of Sri Lanka suffer many hardships at this juncture. Among them are three fatigues—Crisis fatigue, Reform fatigue and last but not the least, the Analysis fatigue. I hope my remarks will not add to this last one. More so because we seem to have an abundance of analysis but are confronted with a paucity of solutions, particularly those based on the imperative of agreed reforms. I emphasise the word ‘agreed’. This is simply to flag the need for a political understanding, if not a consensus on a way forward, anchored in a prudent reform regime. The stark reality is that if the crisis was painful, the reforms needed to recover can be equally or more painful.

Hence my emphasis on a consensual reform regime. That was how other countries – ranging from India to Italy to Greece, to name only a few – prevented such crises from happening or recovered after such crises. Unfortunately, for the people of Sri Lanka, their so-called leaders, on all sides, have failed once again to reach a common understanding on the imperative and substance of reforms. They failed, too, to explain that stark reality to the taxpayers who have to bear the burden of a double jeopardy viz. an agonizing crisis followed by reform pain. Instead, the quarrelling politicians, on both sides, have opted to expose this ‘existential requirement’ of reforms to the unforgiving blood sport, called the election politics, in a very controversial election campaign. Consequently, we have enforced reforms instead of consensual reforms.

Firstly, it suggests a degree of uncertainty and unpredictability to the trajectory and future of reforms,

Secondly, the external inputs needed for recovery are becoming more prescriptive, or even punitive – the latest report by the UN High Commissioner for Human Rights to the ongoing session of HRC, in Geneva, already suggests this unprecedented line of action towards Sri Lanka, even in the context of the reform-restructuring effort under the IMF auspices. I have not seen such an approach in regard to any other similarly affected country. We don’t have a domestic consensus with which one can negotiate credibly with these external interlocutors.

Finally, it can once again open windows for intrusive geopolitical pressures constraining our freedom of choice in public policymaking and governance even as our creditors formulate their medium- and long-term approach to Sri Lanka’s problems, consistent with their own financial and strategic interests.

The forthcoming elections have already become controversial. If and when they are held, they may change some faces but not much else. This is because it is not yet clear whether the outcome of the election will bring about a more constructive and consensual approach to reforms or whether it will aggravate the prevailing polarization of reform hardships being used for regime change again.

This then is the context in which we have to look at the impact of geopolitics on the recovery/reform effort.

Sri Lanka has now reached a semblance of stability with some economic and financial indicators showing good work in progress. There is also a reasonable outcome in negotiations with bilateral, plus multilateral creditors, as well as with the all-important non-state ISB creditors. These happened despite a volatile election season, that is looming large, and related uncertainties. This good work by the negotiators needs to be appreciated. However, the breathing space thus gained to recover and move on, cannot and should not be misconstrued as an assured pathway to sustainable growth. It won’t happen without a political consensus committed to a consistent and continued reform effort over the long haul.

Usual election polemics about undeliverable promises are being heard again. There is unhinged trade union activism, and other disruptive street manifestations not always driven by the principles of collective bargaining but by parochial interests. The State’s propensity to respond to these disruptions and distortions by using water cannons and forceful suppression as a substitute for negotiations is quite worrisome as these already signal the perils of enforced reforms as against consensual reforms. Such reforms that decimate the vulnerable segments of society and multiply poverty can bring about more instability and no agreed pathways. The rising poverty statistics given by UNDP, if accurate, are alarming and depressing.

Obviously, it is necessary to reaffirm the reform imperative. One must also explore how and why it is in Sri Lanka’s national interest to do consensual reforms as against enforced reforms even from a perspective of geopolitics and negotiating the external inputs required to advance the recovery/growth process beyond the current status quo – an inflection point at which Sri Lanka seems to be rather delicately placed .

The term geopolitics is said to be a coinage by the Swedish political scientist Rudolf Kjellén about the turn of the 20th century. It sports many definitions and volumes of literature. Suffice it to say here that geopolitics is no better or no worse than local politics. Geopolitics represents doctrines, policies and practices by major powers to advance their interests by the use or the threat of use of power, often at the expense of some others’ interests. Basically, it is power-based manipulation. It may be hard power or soft power – military, economic or cultural power. Countries that hop from crisis to crisis due to bad macroeconomic deficits and fiscal indiscipline, like Sri Lanka, are particularly vulnerable. Multilateral system entities, like IMF, WB, etc., have ancillary roles in this geopolitical framework. Sri Lankan crisis fits in here as a telling case study. So, geopolitics has been and will continue to figure as synonymous with coercive international politics.

So why bother much about geopolitics or externalities – international system? After all, it is our economy and our work at home. If we get it right here, we can’t go wrong abroad? In an ideal world yes, but not necessarily in the real world. Although there is much talk by the major powers about the primacy of a rules-based order of the world, in reality it is more a world where the rule of force rather than the force of rule applies, as we discussed above. We cannot grow or develop ourselves in isolation. Also, the playing field is uneven and the world is asymmetric.

“… domestic policy objectives cannot be achieved independently of what is happening in the global economy or of the policies of other countries….economic diplomacy is all about reconciling domestic and international policy objectives in an increasingly interdependent if not global, economy….” unquote

The home truth embedded in this diplomatic jargon is that the high moral ground of a ‘rules-based international order’ notwithstanding, we should be pragmatic enough to reconcile our policy objectives with those of other countries – translation: we need to reckon with geopolitical power play.

In its broadest sense, geopolitics have and will interact with both the causes of as well as recovery from Sri Lanka’s economic crisis.

The US-led West and India, plus some analysts in Sri Lanka, opine that a principal contributor to the crisis is the alleged debt trap diplomacy by China, driven by its strategic interests – primarily its aggressive Belt and Road Initiative (BRI) designed to project its rising global footprint. Obviously, this view is connected with complex strategic calculations by the Western alliance and by India for managing and containing the phenomenal rise of China as an economic powerhouse and a major global player. The West and India want to contain China without precipitating an armed conflict or an economic decoupling with that country. Of course, China and Sri Lanka dispute this contention citing much more complex considerations and structural issues as being responsible for the Sri Lankan crisis. In fact, China contends that Sri Lanka is not in a ‘China debt trap’ but in a development trap of its own making. Analysts here, too, feel that the crisis was of Sri Lanka’s own making due to failures in macroeconomic management, governance, public policy blunders – on the whole, a mal-functioning system, political mischief and corruption here – and, very importantly, a long running internationally focused accountability deficit in the country.

One can hardly blame those who surmise that the truth lies somewhere in between these two contentions – namely the preponderance of China in bilateral debt as well as clear and present failures in political leadership, governance, public policy and endemic corruption in this country.

Complexity of these considerations relevant to the genesis of our crisis as well as to recovery therefrom is signified by various perceptions about our crisis by different geopolitical players – some perceptions complement each other while others seem to countervail.

* Negotiating crisis recovery and reaching a sustainable growth path require not only sound economic analysis but also careful diplomacy to corral key creditors onto a common platform beneficial to Sri Lanka. But this is caught up in the triangular rivalry and competition among the US-led West/India on one side and China on the other.

* India would like to frame what it calls its ‘generous’ financial assistance to Sri Lanka during the crisis, as an expression of what it sees as its legitimate sphere of influence in the region, particularly South Asia. Accordingly, Indian assistance may necessitate geopolitical quid pro cos from Sri Lanka.

* The Western/Indian creditors claim that China came on board debt restructuring ‘common ground’ for Sri Lanka owing to diplomatic pressure from their Indo Pacific partners who basically constitute the core of the Paris Club – US Asst Secretary of State Donald Lu during his last visit to Sri Lanka said as much by making this assertion publicly. China predictably disputes this.

* This somewhat tangled web of permutations signifies a complex mix of foreign relations, geopolitics and economic interests.

This notwithstanding, GOSL has done reasonably well so far to navigate the debt restructuring stretch of the recovery process as indicated by the recently announced outcome of negotiations with bilateral state creditors and non-state creditors.

This needs to be built upon a firm foundation of a consistent and continued reforms drive going beyond the grace period secured by Sri Lanka, so as to ensure that reasonable progress so far does not morph into yet another crisis down the road but that progress will transit into a stable growth scenario.

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.