Sri Lanka president proposes anti-narcotics agency with police, military and civil participation

ECONOMYNEXT – Sri Lanka’s President has proposed establishing a new agency under the Anti-Narcotics Act with police, military, and civil agencies presence in a single entity.

“This agency could be tasked with long-term engagement in combating drug-related activities,” Ranil Wickremesinghe was quoted as saying by his media division, during the opening of the Special Operations Command of the Police Special Task Force in Sri Jayewardenepura, on Tuesday (13).

“It is crucial that drug dealers are prevented from undermining society.

“Today, individuals involved in the underworld can exploit new technology, necessitating the introduction of specific laws to control them.

“I propose establishing a new agency under the Anti-Narcotics Act, which would consolidate all police, military, and civil agencies into a single entity with designated powers.”

The newly opened Special Operations Command is set to act as the primary hub for managing public order and motorcycle patrols.

The Director of Special Operations will oversee the operational command of the specialized units within the Special Task Force, reporting directly to the Special Task Force Commander through the Deputy Operations Commander.

The specialized teams at the centre will handle emergencies such as terrorist attacks, violent extremism, public protests, hostage situations, and other similar crises.

“The opening of this Special Operations Centre today marks a significant milestone for the Special Task Force. Originally deployed to Batticaloa to combat LTTE terrorism, this team has evolved into a key force for maintaining law and order in Sri Lanka.

“Increasingly, technology plays a crucial role in every sector, and we need to leverage it more in our security measures.

“We need to re-evaluate and update our strategies for combating these illegal activities.”

Wickremesinghe said Sri Lanka is able to hold the presidential election because law and order have been maintained in the country and the constitution has been upheld.

“Because you restored law and order in July 2022, the people of this country now have the opportunity to vote for a President on September 21.” (Colombo/Aug14/2024)