Sri Lanka welcomes  “Happy Chinese New Year” 2026

Chinese Ambassador Qi Zhenhong expresses hope in the galloping Year of the Horse 2026, both China and Sri Lanka will forge ahead and achieve new and greater accomplishments on their paths of national development and rejuvenation

The Embassy of the People’s Republic of China on Wednesday welcomed the “Happy Chinese New Year” 2026 ceremoniously at the Nelum Pokuna Theatre, Colombo.

Chinese Ambassador Qi Zhenhong in his address said as the Chinese Lunar New Year of the Horse approaches on 16 February, the ceremony at the Nelum Pokuna Theatre was fitting as it is a symbol of China-Sri Lanka friendship.

The Chinese New Year, or the Spring Festival, is the most significant and cherished traditional festival for the Chinese nation. It embodies the cultural values of family reunion, harmony, renewal, and the ushering in of good fortune. No matter where they are, returning home for a family reunion during the New Year remains the deepest emotional bond for hundreds of millions of Chinese. It is heartening to see that the Spring Festival, with its unique charm, is increasingly embraced by the world. Since its inscription last year on UNESCO’s Representative List of the Intangible Cultural Heritage of Humanity, this ancient tradition has gained wider global recognition. It serves not only as a window for the world to understand China but also as a bridge fostering global civilisation dialogue and mutual learning. The ‘Happy Chinese New Year’ cultural activities have taken root in over 100 countries and regions worldwide. The ethos of “Joy, Harmony, and Sharing” it promotes transcends language and borders, allowing people everywhere to feel the joy and warmth of spring.

China and Sri Lanka are good neighbours and reliable partners who stand together through thick and thin. Our friendship, with a history spanning millennia, remains evergreen and strong. Our bilateral relations, built on a foundation of mutual respect, equality, and mutual benefit, have stood the test of time and the changing international landscape, maintaining steady and forward-looking development. The practical cooperation and close people-to-people exchanges between our two countries in various fields, like a pair of steeds galloping side by side, continue to deliver tangible benefits to our peoples and inject positive energy into regional peace and prosperity.

People-to-people and cultural exchanges are the bond that connects hearts and minds. Yunnan, whose name means ‘South of the Colourful Clouds’ is a land in China blessed with diverse ethnic cultures and stunning landscapes. Dali in Yunnan is particularly renowned for its poetic scenery captured in the phrase “Wind, Flower, Snow and Moon” and its unique Bai ethnic culture. Tonight, outstanding artists from the Dali Bai Autonomous Prefecture will present a wonderful performance that blends the cultural flavours of the Bai people with classic Chinese arts. You will enjoy the beautiful melody of “By the Butterfly Spring,” which originates from the region of the Cangshan Mountains and Erhai Lake; appreciate the subtle and profound Eastern aesthetics expressed in the dance “Flowing Stream”; and feel the vibrant rhythm of the “Octagonal Drum and the Rattle Stick”. I believe this performance will serve as another vivid snapshot of the cultural exchange and mutual learning between China and Sri Lanka.

Friends, we are about to welcome the Chinese Lunar Year of the Horse. In Chinese culture, the horse symbolises galloping momentum, endeavour, loyalty, and success. The term “the spirit of the dragon-horse” is often used to praise a tenacious and indefatigable positive attitude. This resonates well with the diligent, courageous, optimistic, and upward spirit of the Sri Lankan people. I sincerely hope that in the galloping Year of the Horse 2026, both China and Sri Lanka will forge ahead and achieve new and greater accomplishments on their paths of national development and rejuvenation! May the friendship and cooperation between our two peoples surge forward like steeds, with a future as boundless as a thousand-mile journey.

Finally, I wish the 2026 ‘Happy Chinese New Year’ events in Sri Lanka a complete success. Wish you all good health, family happiness, and all the best in the New Year.