France-Sri Lanka investment ties gain renewed momentum

MEDEF International, in collaboration with Sri Lanka Embassy in France, hold Sri Lanka Business Forum 2026

The ‘Sri Lanka Business Forum 2026’ was organised by MEDEF International, the French Business Confederation of leading French companies, in partnership with the Sri Lanka Embassy in France on 30 January at the MEDEF Office in Paris.

The event, which was held in hybrid format, had a solid line-up of reputed French companies participating.

Delivering the keynote address, Industry and Entrepreneurship Development Deputy Minister Chathuranga Abeysinghe presented the Government’s policy framework and the reform agenda aimed at strengthening investor confidence, improving ease of doing business, and accelerating export-led growth.

The Deputy Minister elaborated on upcoming legislative reforms, including amendments to the Minerals Act, the Colombo Port City legislative framework, implementation of the Investment Single Window, and the Government’s broader digitisation drive which would contribute towards enhancing transparency and business confidence.

Highlighting Sri Lanka’s comparative advantage in the South and Southeast Asian region, Abeysinghe emphasised France’s role as a strategic investment partner, while inviting French companies to engage with Sri Lanka. The Deputy Minister’s address was followed by a vibrant Q&A where he responded to several questions posed.

The Forum was moderated by MEDEF International France–Sri Lanka Business Council Chairman and Adviser to the Michelin Group Chairman Eric Le Corre.

Delivering welcome remarks, Sri Lankan Ambassador to France and Permanent Delegate to UNESCO Manisha Gunasekera applauded the convening of the Forum as a first step in broadening and deepening the investment partnership.  She appreciated the role of MEDEF in connecting reputed French companies with potential investors and partners in Sri Lanka.

Board of Investment (BOI) Executive Director Priyanka Samaraweera, in her presentation detailed inter alia, investor facilitation measures, fiscal incentives including tax holidays, tariff benefits under preferential trade agreements, and upcoming industrial zones.  The BOI also invited potential French investors to participate in the upcoming Investors’ Forum scheduled to be held in Colombo on 30 March.

The presentation of Orange Marine CEO Didier Dillard on the company’s successful collaboration with Colombo Dockyard PLC in building their cable vessel ‘Sophie Germain’  in 2023, and two additional vessels scheduled for delivery in 2028 and 2029, helped position Sri Lanka as an attractive and competitive investment destination.

The Embassy highlighted ‘Sri Lanka Expo 2026,’ which will be held in Colombo from 18-21 June, as a key global platform for buyers and investors, and encouraged French companies to participate.

Reputed French companies, SNCF, Bureau Veritas, Carrefour, Deviseo Fret, Emovis SAS, Union de Banques Arabes et Françaises (UBAF), Michelin, and Top Tech College participated in the Forum, thus demonstrating the interest among French corporates in doing business with Sri Lanka.  The participating companies reaffirmed that the engagement marked a first step in expanding dialogue and collaboration between France and Sri Lanka.

Senior officials of the Industry and Entrepreneurship Development Ministry and the Export Development Board (EDB) also participated in the Forum. The Forum was organised by the Commercial Section of the Embassy, led by First Secretary – Commerce Prasadi Boomawalage, in consultation with relevant stakeholders.

The success of the Forum reflects the strong commitment of the parties concerned to organise a broader, outcome-oriented engagement with the French private sector in the future.