Fame for Sri Lankan … Down Under

Nalin Jayawardena wasn’t a known name in the scene here … and that’s because he never dabbled in music.

However, after migrating to Australia, over three decades ago, Nalin is much in the spotlight, and it revolves around music as well.

He now lives in Perth, Champion Lake, in the city of Armadale.

His song, titled ‘Uluru’, which he co-wrote with musicians in Sydney, the USA, and back home, in Sri Lanka, to encourage Sri Lankans, Down Under, to support First Nations Australians in getting a voice in the Australia Parliament, has brought Nalin fame.

He was honoured with the title of Senior Citizen of the Year for the City of Armadale.

Unfortunately, Nalin was travelling, on holiday, when the official awards ceremony was held on 26th January – Australia Day – but was specially presented the award by the Mayor of the City of Armadale, on his return.

‘Uluru’ was written by Lakshman Kodithuwakku, with music by Sangeeth Wickremesinghe, and Nalin in the vocal spotlight. The English translation was done by Dr. Vicumpriya Perera.

In fact, Nalin was nominated for two other awards in Armadale, for his community work, but on both occasions he was overseas, on holiday, and couldn’t make it for the celebrations.

He also had letters, coming his way, from Prime Minister Anthony Albanese and the Federal Indigenous Minister at the time, Linda Burney.

“Believe me, I was over the moon to see the leader of the country, who listened to my song, and asked the Minister to write a letter to me.”

Nalin went on to say that his journey to Australia inspired him to write music about the Indigenous community.

“I think after migrating, we saw the history here and how Indigenous people were treated and all the trouble they have experienced,” he said.

“They get involved in the art and craft and my idea was to highlight the issues as a tribute to the Indigenous people.”

According to Nalin, his songs were collaborations between friends and family.

“My brother is a good musician, too, living in Australia, so we get together with international Sri Lankan artistes and it’s not just about one person.

“I get the track, and I do my voicing in my home studio and then I send it to Sri Lanka to get it mixed and mastered.

“The internet made is very, very easy for us to collaborate.”

Music has always been an interest for Nalin, with approximately 500 original songs produced and published, most of which are based on the community.

“It’s about community living standards or criticising the community if they are doing something they are not supposed to do.”

Nalin’s love for music began in 2004, following the tsunami that devastated Sri Lanka.

He and his brother made a song, as a fund raiser, and the money was sent to Sri Lanka.

Enduring legacy of Most Ven. Anamaduwe Sri Rathanapala Buddharakkhita Dhammadassi Anunayake Maha Thera

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.