A Historic First: Sri Lanka’s capital market leaders bring investor forum to Saudi Arabia

The Securities and Exchange Commission of Sri Lanka (SEC) and the Colombo Stock Exchange (CSE), in association with the Embassy of Sri Lanka to the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, successfully convened an investor forum on Saturday 24th January 2026 at the Radisson Blu Hotel, Riyadh Convention & Exhibition Center. Alongside the forum, the SEC and CSE facilitated a meeting with the Public Investment Fund (PIF) which is Saudi Arabia’s main sovereign wealth fund.

The forum was organized to engage directly with the vibrant Sri Lankan expatriate community in the Kingdom and international investors, highlighting compelling opportunities within Sri Lanka’s capital market following the country’s successful exit from sovereign default and restoration of macroeconomic stability.

The forum was marked by the presence of several senior level policy officials, market leaders and market regulators including; Dr. P. Nandalal Weerasinghe, Governor of the Central Bank of Sri Lanka (CBSL); Chathuranga Abeysinghe, Deputy Minister of Industry and Entrepreneurship Development; Ameer Ajwad Ambassador of Sri Lanka to the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia.; Senior Prof D.B.P.H. Dissabandara, Chairman of the SEC; Ray Abeywardena, Director of CSE; and Dr. Naveen Gunawardane, Co-Founder and Managing Director of Lynear Wealth Management.

In his welcome address, Ameer Ajwad stated, that a significant opportunity remains in broadening public participation in the capital market of Sri Lanka. As financial literacy and investment awareness among potential investors are limited, the investor forum would serve to bridge the knowledge gap. The forum offered an excellent opportunity for first-time investors, overseas investors, and those seeking to enhance their knowledge, to learn how to invest prudently, manage risk, and build wealth with discipline and confidence. Ambassador invited participants to make full use of the presence of high-level authorities from Sri Lanka’s key financial institutions, such as the Central Bank of Sri Lanka, the SEC, and the CSE, and to explore investment opportunities in Sri Lanka’s capital market, not only as a pathway to financial growth but also as a meaningful contribution to Sri Lanka’s resilience and long-term prosperity.

Oxford Chester Uni of Higher Education opens head office at Gangaramaya Educational Hub

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.