Kala Pola 2024 – A spectacular celebration of Sri Lankan visual art

Kala Pola 2024 – Sri Lanka’s Annual Open Air Art Fair – held on February 18th along Ananda Coomaraswamy Mawatha, Colombo 7 brought success for both artists and visitors alike, generating estimated sales of approximately Rs. 51 million, excluding commissioned artwork.

Commemorating its 31st year, Kala Pola is Sri Lanka’s largest and longest-running platform for artists and sculptors to showcase their talent and connect with buyers, industry professionals, and the artist community. A long-term collaboration of the George Keyt Foundation and John Keells Group, the event drew a tremendous response, attracting 368 artists and an estimated 38,000 visitors (including both footfall and vehicular presence in the event area).

The official ceremony was graced by Santosh Jha, the Indian High Commissioner to Sri Lanka, as the chief guest along with Malaka Talwatte, Chairman of the George Keyt Foundation (GKF), accompanied by the trustees of GKF and Krishan Balendra, Chairperson of the John Keells Group, along with members of the senior management of the Group.

In his welcome address at the official ceremony, Malaka Talwatte, GKF’s Chairperson, said, “We have had a great turnout today. We strongly believe that art is for everyone and that every artist should have the opportunity to showcase their work. That is what Kala Pola is about. This platform has had phenomenal growth over the years, mainly because of the support of our Partner, the John Keells Group. They have been instrumental in scaling this up to what you see today. From 30 artists in 1993, today we have over 350 artists showing their work.”

In his address, Santosh Jha noted, “This effort is significant because it is bringing art out of the galleries to the community. The fair format you have and its uncurated exhibition blends a naturalness and spontaneity, which should be characteristic of the art forms. Art is not just for indulgence, it’s much more. It can be a catalyst for social dialogue, a provocation for change, a challenge to the stereotype, and a canvas for new ideas.” He went on to commend GKF and the John Keells Group for their continued partnership which has driven the growth of Kala Pola.

Commenting on the event and the focus on arts and culture by the John Keells Group, Carmeline Jayasuriya, the Head of Corporate Social Responsibility, said “We are delighted with the success of Kala Pola 2024. While we have undertaken many diverse initiatives under the Arts & Culture pillar, Kala Pola remains a unique and fundamental aspect of our roadmap aimed at boosting artists’ livelihoods, safeguarding and promoting Sri Lankan arts and culture, and catalysing social cohesion and wellbeing through artistic and creative expression. We are excited about the potential of these endeavours in contributing to the growth of creative economies.”

Swarna Abeytunge, an artist who showcased her work at Kala Pola 2024 said, ‘Hats off to the organisers of Kala Pola for organising this event very methodically without any chaos! This is the only platform in Sri Lanka which gives the equal opportunity to all the artists without any discrimination. This was my first time at Kala Pola as an artist and I am glad that it ended successfully.”

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.