Servility, theatrics and lawfare

The police did precious little to prevent the various events, held in the North and the East on Monday, to commemorate the LTTE members killed during Eelam War IV. Some of the youth who attended those commemorations were seen blatantly flouting traffic laws by riding motorcycles without wearing helmets in an unruly manner. The police looked the other way. But they went all out to prevent a group led by National Freedom Front Leader and former minister Wimal Weerawansa from paying a floral tribute to the War Heroes’ Memorial at Battaramulla on Monday. Subsequently, they claimed that they had done so in view of rehearsals for the following day’s commemorative event, and warned that legal action would be taken against Weerawansa. This is an instance of the police resorting to lawfare to harass and intimidate the political opponents of the government. It is something to be expected, for the JVP/NPP has elevated two of its Retired Police Collective members as the Secretary to the Public Security Ministry and the Director of the CID, which is apparently busy with political work rather than crime investigation.

The police statement on Monday’s incident at the War Heroes’ Memorial is as absurd a claim they made during the Mahinda Rajapaksa government when they were asked by the media why they had allowed a group of pro-government goons armed with clubs to operate alongside the riot police to crush an Opposition protest in Colombo. The then Police Spokesman had the audacity to claim those characters may have carried ‘sticks’ to chase away street dogs.

The police are adept at fabricating stories in a bid to justify their politically determined action aimed at pleasing governments. There is no way they can justify their action near the War Heroes’ Memorial on Monday. It was obvious that Weerawansa and his supporters sought political mileage by visiting the place with television crews in tow. However, there would have been no commotion if the police had allowed them to lay flowers at the memorial.

The police were part of the JVP/NPP ensemble that recently enacted the “Malwana drama”, where some members of the JVP’s university student wing grabbed a state-owned mansion set on fire during Aragalaya (2022). The JVP undergrads overcame what the police made out to be resistance, forced themselves into the mansion and spent several days there. The incident reminded us of “Police Kolama”, a comic segment in Sri Lanka’s masked folk drama. Subsequently, Prime Minister Dr. Harini Amarasuriya, in a cameo, displayed her acting skills by meeting the dramatis personae of the Malwana play, which was directed and produced by the JVP/NPP, and agreeing to have what remains of the mansion taken over by the University Grants Commission. They could have reached that agreement without an absurd drama. The police did not initiate any action against the JVP students for the forcible occupation of state property. They also looked on when a group of JVP members blatantly violated the law by parking their buses on the southern expressway on 01 May, 2025. They unashamedly sided with a JVP mob that stormed an FSP party office in Yakkala, assaulted FSP members and seized control of the place. The JVP/NPP politicians are free to drive under the influence of alcohol, and breathalyzers mysteriously disappear from police stations when they happen to cause accidents. But the police swing into action when Opposition politicians hold protests or commemorative events that are not to the liking of the JVP-NPP government.

Oddly, the JVP-led government has done to the police what the JVP accused the previous government of doing to them; it has reduced them to mere putty in its hands and uses them to suppress the Opposition. The police, who were accused of using extrajudicial methods to crush two JVP uprisings, are now at the beck and call of the JVP, which is emulating the previous governments in handling dissent. So much for the new political culture the JVP/NPP promised to usher in.

President Anura Kumara Dissanayake often claims that his government has restored the rule of law, and no person/institution is above the law. If he supposes so, one will say a la Mr. Bumble in Oliver Twist, the law is an ass.

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.