Discounts at Food Studio, One Galle Face and Colombo City Centre for CH17 Cardholders

CH17 Loyalty CEO/Founder Jumar Preena with Food Studio Head of Commercial Louzanne Perera

CH17 Loyalty inked a deal with Food Studio  for privilege dining experiences for CH17 cardholders at two of the FS managed food courts in the city’s most popular malls - One Galle Face & the Colombo City Centre mall.

CH17 Loyalty plans to offer bigger discounts for selected card schemes to reward cardholders who have been loyal members of CH17 for a long period of time. “We thank all those who have been with us in our 11-year journey that has made CH17 the most sought after loyalty program provider in the country today,” CEO/Founder Jumar Preena said.

“We want to be different, by being attractive to the customer, purposeful to the retailer and unique in business. No charges are levied either from the vendor or the customer. We help the retailer’s business by promoting them to our large customer base, and in return, they offer attractive discounts which are passed on in full to the customer.  We are different to the loyalty or discount schemes most of the customers are used to, we offer privilege facility for 7 days of the week continuously for a period of 12 months (although limited to 3 months with Food Studio). Where else could you get these kinds of benefits? queried Jumar.

“We have also developed a unique process for card authentication, which was developed at the request of Food Studio. This is to ensure 100% accuracy, absolutely no room for misuse or abuse of promo codes, which are widespread in other existing formats,” he added.

He also said the tie-up with Food Studio gives cardholders an opportunity to enjoy good food within a great ambiance.

Food Studio Head of Commercial Louzanne Perera said:  Engaging with and retaining our customers and giving them highest value has always been a top priority at Food Studio. We have found CH17 Loyalty to be a great service which will no doubt help us build greater relationships with our existing customers, whilst motivating a larger base to try out our food and beverage offerings. We are excited to see where this partnership will lead us.”