Thalatha marks first appearance on Ranil’s Presidential campaign trail

Former SJB MP Thalatha Athukorala with President Ranil Wickremesinghe at the Presidential Election rally in Welimada

Former SJB MP Thalatha Athukorala yesterday pledged her support to President Ranil Wickremesinghe at the Presidential Election 2024. Here Athukorala is seen walking into the rally held in Welimada yesterday

Expresses confidence in President Ranil Wickremesinghe’s victory on 21 September

Claims Wickremesinghe is the only leader who has always stepped up in times of crisis

Assures people President Wickremesinghe will deliver on his promises after being elected

Former Samagi Jana Balawegaya (SJB) MP Thalatha Athukorala, who recently resigned from her Parliamentary role, announced her support for independent Presidential candidate Ranil Wickremesinghe yesterday. She joined Wickremesinghe at a rally in Welimada, marking her first appearance on his Presidential campaign trail.

At the rally, Athukorala expressed her confidence in Wickremesinghe’s victory on 21 September. She said, following his win, Wickremesinghe would focus on completing the remaining 50% of the work needed to improve and uplift the lives of the people.

Athukorala emphasised that Wickremesinghe is uniquely positioned to achieve this, having consistently stepped up with great grit during times of crisis. “He will deliver on his promises,” she assured the crowd.

On 21 August, Athukorala announced her resignation from Parliament delivering a scathing critique of SJB Presidential candidate Sajith Premadasa before stepping down. At the time, Athukorala questioned Sajith Premadasa’s leadership qualities and his suitability to lead the country at this critical time.

She also underscored the importance of patience in politics, stating her belief that this was not the right time for Sajith Premadasa to pursue the Presidency of Sri Lanka.

Athukorala also expressed deep regret over the division of the UNP and the recent failure of the UNP and the SJB to unite ahead of the Presidential election. Just days later, it was reported that Athukorala had joined the United National Party (UNP) led by Wickremesinghe.