Build Beyond 2026 Technology Summit Tokyo Cement inspires future-ready construction

Panel discussion at Build Beyond 2026 Summit featuring Eng. Ananda Senarath, Eng. Nissanka Wijerathne, Eng. Shiromal Fernando and Dr. Rohan Karunaratne, moderated by Prof. Kushan Wijesundara

Tokyo Cement hosted the Build Beyond 2026 Summit, a premier knowledge-sharing conference that brought together leading academics, civil and structural engineering experts and professionals of the Sri Lankan construction industry.

The event featured keynote addresses by renowned construction technology specialists, Professor Shashank Bishnoi from the Indian Institute of Technology Delhi-Abu Dhabi and Senior Professor Priyan Mendis from the University of Melbourne.

The summit marked the second edition of the Build Beyond Engineering Technology Summit organised by the Tokyo Cement group, designed to foster collaboration between academia and industry while highlighting global trends, innovations and emerging technologies in cement and concrete. This year’s discussions focused on advancements in material science that are driving more sustainable and cost-efficient construction practices.

The event drew participation from state-sector authorities, research institutions, academia, engineering students and public and private sector organisations, creating a dynamic platform for engagement across the construction industry.

A key feature of the summit was a high-level panel discussion on ‘Building a Resilient and Sustainable Construction Future’, featuring several distinguished industry leaders.

The panel included, Chamber of Construction Industry Sri Lanka Secretary General and CEO and Civil & Structural Engineering Consultants (Pvt.) Ltd founder and Deputy Chairman Eng. Nissanka Wijerathne, CTBUH Sri Lanka Chairman, Green Building Council Sri Lanka Vice President, General Sir John Kotelawala Defense University Adjunct Senior Lecturer and University of Moratuwa visiting lecturer Eng. Shiromal Fernando, Society of Structural Engineers Sri Lanka Fellow and Past President and Association of Consulting Engineers Sri Lanka Council Member Eng. Ananda Senarath and Ceylon Institute of Builders and South Asian Lean Construction Association President Dr. Rohan Karunaratne. The session was moderated by University of Peradeniya Faculty of Engineering Civil Engineering Department Head Prof. Kushan Wijesundara.

Senior Professor Priyan Mendis from University of Melbourne speaks at Build Beyond 2026 Summit

Prof. Bishnoi delivered two keynote presentations on low-carbon construction technologies. His first session ‘Development and Use of Low Carbon Cements’, explored his work on Limestone Calcined Clay Cement (LC3) and the development of the LC3 standard adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards. His second presentation ‘Design and Application of Low Carbon Concretes’ addressed sustainable concrete solutions in relation to the Sri Lankan construction sector.

Prof. Mendis delivered his keynote on ‘Net Zero: Materials to Novel Structural Applications’. He highlighted the role of high-performance concrete in improving durability, strength and resistance to environmental stress in modern high-rise and large-scale structures. Drawing from international case studies and his experience in serving several Australian and international standards committees related to concrete structures and structural loading, Prof. Mendis shared insights from his involvement in the construction of iconic projects including Burj Khalifa, Merdeka 118, Eureka Tower and Lotus Tower.

Representing the Tokyo Cement group, Director R&D Dr. M.G.M.U. Ismail and Director Innovations Praveen Gnanam presented the company’s latest advancements in cement and concrete technologies, reinforcing its focus on sustainable and innovative construction solutions.

The summit reaffirmed the Tokyo Cement group’s commitment to strengthening the local construction industry through world-class knowledge-sharing initiatives and access to global expertise. As Sri Lanka’s largest manufacturer of cement, concrete and cement-based innovative products, the Tokyo Cement group has cemented its position as the leading partner in Nation-building with an unwavering focus on quality, innovation and sustainability.