Stop fighting,start loving

When we are in love we usually do not fight with our partners. After marriage, however, differences emerge and spouses begin to fight. In many marriages spouses keep on arguing about the same issues. Take heart, there are ways to break that vicious cycle and make the husband and wife feel like winners.

Arguments may start over something very trivial. A wife may accuse her husband for always being indecisive and a hopeless spendthrift. The exchange will end up with one spouse leaving the house. After some time, both of them will feel that they had misunderstood each other. You have to consider why you keep getting into the same argument over and over again. Psychologists who study the ways married couples communicate with each other have shed some light on this problem.

In the first place, each spouse gets into arguments in order to save face or safeguard his or her image. Nobody wants to accept defeat. Then the problem begins. Sometimes you know that you are at fault, but you are not willing to accept it. Very often any attack on your self-esteem can be unbearable. Both spouses forget that they had vowed to settle their problems amicably when they got married.

In some families, spouses recycle fights. They tend to read meanings to each other’s charges that may be true or imaginary. Patterns of conflict are rooted in the way you treat your spouse. On the other hand, the real cause of the argument is seldom the discontent. Some couples regularly fight by nagging each other. This has to be avoided.

A wife who knew that her husband was an ardent cricket fan stopped arguing with him when she came to know that he had neglected many social events because of cricket. She also knew that he had very good qualities as a husband. Sometime later the husband too realised that he was neglecting the home front and decided to help his wife. Thereafter their marriage took a different turn.

Among all the communication skills listening is the most basic. It is the easiest to learn and help build trust and respect. On the other hand, if you wish to have a perfect relationship, do not believe in marriage myths. One major myth is that marriage is a meeting of minds. Nobody can understand another person’s mind clearly because we view the world in different ways. Although it is good to respect each other’s views, men and women are wired differently.

Being in love is not like falling in love. When you are in love for some time your intense feelings will undergo drastic changes. When this happens you have to move into the next stage of love by improving your commitment and deepening your affection. This may be a difficult task at the beginning, but it can be done.

However much you love your partner, you cannot solve all the household problems. Marriage is somewhat like running a country. No head of state will be able to solve all the problems of his countrymen. In a marriage we have to accept defeat or sacrifice our beliefs. In this respect healthy couples always agree to disagree.

You cannot avoid bitter arguments in a marriage all the time. In fact, arguments are necessary to release your tension. What is more critical is how you argue. Most couples argue with each other because their daily life is not stimulating enough. Some people believe that spouses argue because they are not sexually satisfied. This is another myth. Sex comprises about 10 per cent of what is important in a marriage. However, if there is no sexual satisfaction, it may turn out to be a big issue. According to psychologists, there should be a sexual bond to make you feel that you are more than friends. You are mates – soul mates!

If married couples are constantly fighting, they can focus on what is good. Most couples in troubled relationships notice only the bad things in life. According to a noted marriage counsellor, you should swap compliments for at least five minutes every day. Such a practice will go a long way to strengthen the marriage bond. After marriage do not dig into each other’s past. Past romantic escapades are dead and gone. There is no need to discuss them when you are in a partnership.

While staying in a house as a paying guest, a young man noticed the landlady’s disturbing traits and her persistent criticism of her husband. She apparently loved him but in relationships peevishness often directs itself to what is closest at hand. Her digs included, “Rex, you’re so antisocial. You’re a fixture in front of the idiot box. Sometimes he pretended to ignore her tirades or would growl, “Oh, Mary for God’s sake, cut it out.” One day Mary told her paying guest that her husband never listened to her. Their shouting and arguments continued confirming the old saying, “Conditioned patterns die hard.”

In any relationship the feeling of rejection, of being unaccepted or discarded can be the most painful version of not getting what you want from the other partner. You may be rejected for a variety of reasons. Some rejections are bigger than others. They can range from a simple no to a snub or a betrayal. Psychologists advise people to think of rejection as God’s protection. Try to find the meaning of a rejection in a wider context.

What really happens in the marital battleground cannot be predicted accurately. Emotional wear and tear in a relationship usually takes its biological toll. Marital conflicts can occur at any stage of the marriage. Daniel Goleman in ‘Social Intelligence’ says that when husbands withdrew in anger during disagreements, wives’ stress hormones zoomed upwards. On the other hand, wives whose husbands displayed kindness and empathy during the disagreement reflected their relief in lower levels of the same hormones. Research suggests that wives are more vulnerable to suffer the health costs of a rocky marriage than their husbands.

Another factor is that wives spend far more time than their husbands ruminating about upsetting encounters. Troubles in a close relationship such as marriage drive adverse biological reactions in wives more strongly than in husbands. Much of the tension in a marriage can be lessened by touching the body of your spouse passionately. When you do so, oxytocin releases making the body to undergo a host of healthy changes. Even your blood pressure will lower as you slide into a relaxed mode of parasympathetic activity.

Although arguments, counter arguments and conflicts are inevitable in any marriage, husbands and wives should be able to cope with them and lead a happy married life.

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.