Govt. heading into an imbroglio

The JVP-NPP government is painting itself into a corner by trying to increase the retirement ages of the superior court judges through a constitutional amendment amidst protests from various reputable organisations, representing lawyers, judges, civil society outfits and religious leaders. The Bar Association of Sri Lanka (BASL) is leading the battle against the government’s politically motivated efforts to extend the retirement ages of the judges of the Supreme Court and the Court of Appeal.

The Church of Ceylon has also expressed deep concern and disappointment over the Cabinet decision to proceed with a constitutional amendment to raise the retirement ages of the appellate court judges. It has said it hopes that the President and the Cabinet will heed the strong arguments of the BASL, the wider legal community, and civil society. Warning that the proposed move could undermine the rule of law and public confidence in judicial independence, the Church of Ceylon has noted that the government’s justification, citing the need to clear case backlogs, was weakened by the fact that appellate court vacancies remain unfilled without any rational explanation. It has concluded that the real motivation for the proposed constitutional amendment lacks bona fides.

The government is peddling an absurd argument that the proposed constitutional amendment to increase judges’ retirement ages is intended to clear a huge backlog of court cases including those against the former rulers and their associates, and therefore the opponents of its move are trying to protect the corrupt. Among the professional organisations that have opposed the government move are the Judicial Service Association of Sri Lanka (JSASL), representing Magistrates and District Court judges, the Commonwealth Lawyers’ Association, LAWASIA and several local legal organisations including the Colombo High Court Lawyers’ Association. The government has caused an affront to the dignity of these organisations as well as religious leaders who have taken exception to its arbitrary action.

If the government goes ahead with the controversial constitutional amendment, it will place the Supreme Court judges in an awkward position as they will have to hear petitions to be filed against the government move, which is expected to benefit them. This will amount to a violation of the fundamental legal maxim of natural justice––”one should not hear one’s own case”––as legal experts have argued.

Legal experts have viewed the government move at issue as an attempt at bribery. MP Dayasiri Jayasekera yesterday lodged a complaint with the Commission to Investigate Allegations of Bribery or Corruption against the Cabinet decision to raise the retirement ages of the judges. He has demanded an investigation.

As for the claim that the proposed constitutional amendment is aimed at clearing a huge case backlog, the government does not have a leg to stand on; nearly 95% of the cases in the country are pending before Magistrates’ Courts and District Courts, according to legal experts, and the extension of the retirement ages of the superior court judges will not help solve the problem. Delays on the part of several other state institutions, such as the Attorney General’s Department, the Government Analyst’s Department and the police have contributed to the case backlog. Among the proposed remedial measures are filling judicial vacancies, setting up more courts and appointing more judges, digitalisation, recruiting more personnel to the aforesaid vital departments, strengthening mediation and court-annexed settlement, creating a dedicated backlog clearing programme and introducing stronger case management procedures.

Legal experts insist that the proposed constitutional amendment will have to be presented to the people at a referendum if it is to gain acceptability. Otherwise, it will lack legitimacy, even if passed with a two-thirds majority. Worse, it is bound to have a corrosive effect on the legitimacy of the judges who will benefit therefrom. The proposed government action will create a bad precedent. If the JVP/NPP succeeds in its endeavour, a future government with a two-thirds majority will be able to abolish the constitutional amendment at issue or even move a fresh one to reduce the retirement ages of judges.

The proposed constitutional amendment, which is widely seen as an attempt to retain one particular judge, amounts to undermining the independence of the judiciary, as the BASL and others have pointed out. What the current rulers should bear in mind is that the boot will be on the other foot when they lose power. Their questionable action will create conditions for the next government to interfere with the judiciary. There are already very serious allegations against some JVP-NPP politicians, including the 323-freight container scandal, the coal procurement fraud and numerous import rackets.

The government ought to concentrate on introducing a new Constitution in keeping with a solemn pledge in its election manifesto, A Thriving nation, A Beautiful Life instead of trying to bring in piecemeal constitutional amendments to further its political interests. There is still time for a course correction.

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.