President assures an efficient public service, justice for controversial crimes

Delivering the new government’s policy statement, President Anura Kumara Dissanayake emphasized the importance of public accountability, highlighting that the Parliament is no longer a concealed institution to the general public.

“The Parliament is not a hidden cave anymore. Daily proceedings are open to public scrutiny. As representatives of the people, everything we do—how we speak, how we behave—is under their watchful eye.”

The public’s duty does not end with electing us; they have the right to scrutinize us until the next mandate. I believe this Parliament is capable of passing such scrutiny,” the President said, during the inaugural session of the 10th Parliament today (21).

Addressing the public sector’s critical role, President Dissanayake underlined the historic mandate given to his government by the public sector and the need to transform the public service into an efficient and people-centered institution.

“The mandate we received is the highest ever from public servants. Yet, neither the public nor public employees are satisfied with the state of the public service today. Our responsibility is to create a public service that satisfies both those who work in the sector and the people they serve,” he stated.

The President added: “The public servants’ mandate represents their partiality in our policy for establishing a favourable public service. We cannot move forward without a strong public service. Public sector activity is important for the political authority as well.”

Dissanayake also reaffirmed his commitment to establishing an efficient and impartial public sector that works in the people’s favor, asserting that “an effective public service is vital for political authority and public confidence alike.”

Emphasizing his vision for democracy, independence and justice, President Dissanayake declared: “No one should be left behind based on religion, culture, language, or political ideology. Freedom belongs to everyone. It is our collective responsibility to create a democratic and free nation where people can live without fear or doubt.

“A cornerstone of this effort is upholding the rule of law. This cannot be achieved solely through legislation passed in Parliament; laws must be implemented effectively. The public must feel that justice is served. Over the past years, public trust in the legal system has been severely eroded.”

Furthermore, Dissanayake affirmed: “The government and the presidency are not above the law. Authority figures will remain accountable. No one with authority is above the law. We are not here to exact revenge, but to ensure everyone’s right to participate in politics freely.”

The President assured that justice will be served for the victims of all high-profile and controversial crimes, and those found guilty will face punishment, noting, “this is essential for restoring public confidence in the legal system.”

“We must create a government where laws are fair and justice prevails. Failing to establish with this kind of a mandate would mean that we will never be able to do that. Without justice and fairness in addressing corruption and crime, the dreams of this country will perish”, he expressed.