CIPM Sri Lanka and KDU to 0pen new vistas for students

CIPM Sri Lanka – the Nation’s leader in human resource management recently entered into a memorandum of understanding with the General Sir John Kotelawala Defence University (KDU) to expand educational opportunities and explore new vistas for their students.

“We are confident that the learning and professional development opportunities at CIPM, which are widely acknowledged as the best in the field of HRM and industry, our international affiliations with people management organizations such as the Asia Pacific Federation of Human Resource Management (APFHRM), World Federation of People Management Associations (WFPMA), and regional HRM bodies will open new vistas for the students. The knowledge exchanges envisaged in this collaboration between 2 mighty like-minded institutions, KDU and CIPM, will no doubt benefit the students and faculty alike,” said U. A. C Obeyesekere, Chief Executive Officer of CIPM Sri Lanka.

The signing of the MOU took place at the KDU Vice Chancellor’s office with Saman Jayawickkrama – Honorary Secretary of CIPM Sri Lanka; Air Vice Marshal Manoj Keppetipola – Honorary Editor; Harendra Hewakuruppu – Council Member, U. A. C. Obeyesekere – Chief Executive Officer, Sujeewa Perera – Manager Examination, and Ravindu Sachintha – Assistant Manager, Professional and Academic Affairs representing CIPM Sri Lanka while Rear Admiral H.G.U. Dammika Kumara – Vice Chancellor; Prof. K. A. S. Dhammika, Deputy Vice-Chancellor Academics, Dr Ms L. Liyanage – Dean, Faculty of Management, Social Sciences & Humanities; Ms D. D. Lokuge – Head of the Department of Management and Finance, and other academic staff represented the KDU.

Serendib Flour Mills launches fortified ‘Adi Shakthi’ flour in Kandy

CIPM wins 3 awards at National Business Excellence Awards 2022

Dhammika Fernando awarded Lifetime Gold Medal by CIPM Sri Lanka

CIPM Discusses Developing HR for Sustainable Growth with Labour Minister

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.