CFA Capital Market Awards 2026 Senfin Money Market Fund wins Gold for 5th consecutive year

From left: Senior Portfolio Analyst Trevyn Ganeshan, Trainee Investment Analyst Shamel Bandaranayeka, Chief Investment Officer Surath Perera, Colombo Stock Exchange CEO Rajeeva Bandaranayake, Panel of Judges Chair Ruvini Fernando, Trainee Investment Analyst Dulanya De Alwis, Trainee Investment Analyst Amanda Deraniyagala and SFAM Director and CEO Jeevan Sukumaran

Senfin Asset Management (SFAM) has once again affirmed its position at the forefront of Sri Lanka’s fund management industry, with its flagship Senfin Money Market Fund (SMMF) named as the Best Unit Trust Fund at CFA Society Sri Lanka Capital Market Awards 2026.

This marks the fifth consecutive Gold award win for SMMF, following the Gold wins in 2022, 2023, 2024 and 2025 and a Silver award in 2021.

The 13th edition of the CFA Society Sri Lanka Capital Market Awards was held on September 10, 2026, at Cinnamon Grand, Colombo.

The event was graced by Securities and Exchange Commission Chairman Senior Professor Hareendra Dissabandara and Colombo Stock Exchange (CSE) Chairman Dimuthu Abeyesekera and attended by CFA Institute Regional Director Society Relations APAC Reseena Abdullah.

CFA Society Sri Lanka President Rashmi Peiris Paranavitane, delivering the opening address noted that Sri Lanka’s capital markets are operating in an increasingly complex environment, shaped by economic and regulatory developments, artificial intelligence and geopolitical shifts and that the ability to interpret complexity and uphold high standards has become more important than ever.

SFAM remains fully committed to transparency, providing comprehensive disclosures to all unit holders regardless of the investment amount and continues to adhere to the Global Investment Performance Standards framework. SFAM also claims compliance with the CFA Institute Asset Manager Code of Professional Conduct*.

SFAM has made a conscious effort to ensure that the asset quality of SMMF takes the highest priority as opposed to exposing the unitholders to unnecessary risk in pursuit of a higher yield, with the fund ensuring 95.2 percent of investments are in the A-rated or above investments.

SFAM also holds a Fitch credit rating, having become the first standalone asset management company in Sri Lanka to be Fitch-rated and remains the only Fitch-rated money market fund in the country.

SFAM’s online platform (www.senfinassetmanagement.com) supports end-to-end client onboarding, including KYC, investing, redemptions, switching and live inquiries, with application forms available in all three languages in fully editable, digitally signable PDF formats. The platform is mobile- and data-friendly, with FAQs, an educational media section, live chat and fund pages carrying the Key Investor Information Document (KIID), fact sheets and trust deeds.

Money market unit trust funds such as SMMF remain ideally suited to short-term cash management for individuals and corporations, with same-business-day redemption and no penalty to the investor. SMMF, launched in 2014, continues to invest in a well-diversified portfolio of government securities, term deposits of banks and non-bank financial institutions, repurchase agreements and corporate debt, all with maturities under 397 days. The fund’s trustee is Hatton National Bank PLC. With a minimum investment of Rs.1,000 and a management fee of 0.15 percent per annum, the fund remains highly accessible.

In terms of the fund performance, SMMF has delivered a one-month annualised return of 9.42 percent.

In addition to SMMF, the company offers fund management solutions covering fixed-income, equity and Shariah-compliant funds. The Senfin Dynamic Income Fund invests in fixed-income securities beyond 13-month maturities, aiming to maximise returns through active portfolio management.

The Senfin Growth Fund targets long-term capital growth through the CSE-listed equities in well-managed, high-growth-potential companies. The Senfin Dividend Fund generates current income and capital gains through a diversified portfolio of dividend-paying CSE-listed stocks.

The Senfin Insurance Sector Fund and Senfin Financial Services Fund invest in the CSE-listed equities with direct exposure to the insurance and financial services sectors, respectively, while the Senfin Consumer Staples Fund invests across Sri Lanka’s retail and consumer sectors.

The Senfin Shariah Income Fund and Senfin Shariah Balanced Fund are Shariah-compliant unit trusts investing in Shariah-compliant securities and Shariah-compliant CSE-listed equities, respectively.  The Senfin Select Factor Fund targets long-term capital appreciation through a disciplined, 10-KPI equity selection process and has delivered a 5.28 percent year-to-date return, making it the best-performing growth unit trust fund in the industry. SFAM is a fully-owned subsidiary of Senkadagala Finance PLC, a Central Bank of Sri Lanka licensed finance company, with a 57+ year history, 125+ branch network and 950+ workforce. SFAM’s sister company Senfin Securities (Pvt.) Ltd is one of the leading CSE licensed stockbroking companies.

As a responsible asset management company, we always encourage potential investors to consult their financial advisers if they are unsure whether a product is suitable for their individual or corporate needs.

Unit trust investments are subject to market risks and the price of units could go down as well as up. The company asks that investors read the KIID of the fund and consider the fees and other charges among other things before investing.