Noyon celebrates over century of lace heritage and 20 years of design and craftsmanship in Sri Lanka

From right: MAS Holdings Co-founder Sharad Amalean, Olivier Noyon, Shaila Amalean, MAS Holdings Chairman and Co-Founder Mahesh Amalean, Chargé d’Affaires a.i. of Embassy of France in Colombo Marie-Noelle Duris, MAS Holdings CEO Suren Fernando, Noyon Lanka CEO Husni Salieh, and other officials.

From left: MAS Holdings Chairman and Co-Founder Mahesh Amalean, Olivier Noyon with Noyon Lanka CEO Husni Salieh

MAS Holdings CEO Suren Fernando welcoming Chargé d’Affaires a.i. of Embassy of France in Colombo Marie-Noelle Duris

Noyon Lanka Ltd., a leader in lace design and sustainable textile manufacturing, marked its 20-year anniversary in Sri Lanka with a special event under the theme 100 Years of Lace Heritage, 20 Years of Design and Craftsmanship. Noyon, a globally renowned lace design to delivery solutions provider, celebrated this occasion at its Headquarters in Biyagama, on 21 October 2024. The event brought together MAS Holdings Chairman Mahesh Amalean, Deputy Chairman Sharad Amalean, and Noyon Calais Former President Olivier Noyon, key drivers of the collaboration between MAS Holdings and the French lace manufacturing company, Noyon Calais, over twenty years ago. Also gracing the event were French Embassy of Sri Lanka and the Maldives acting Ambassador Marie Noelle, Biyagama Free Trade Zone Director – Board of Investments Kithsiri Kumarasinghe, MAS Holdings CEO Suren Fernando, and Noyon Lanka CEO Husni Salieh.

Reflecting on the early vision for Noyon, Mahesh Amalean expressed, “When we first envisioned Noyon Lanka, it was about bringing the delicate art of French lace to a new frontier. Today, we’ve placed Sri Lanka on the global map for textile manufacturing with tremendous progress, diversifying and excelling beyond lace.”

Olivier Noyon, commenting on the company’s evolution since the partnership began, said, “Noyon Lanka has achieved remarkable success while maintaining the spirit of French lace craftsmanship. Their excellence and growth continue to set the highest standard in the industry.”

With a presence that spans across, Europe, Sri Lanka, Indonesia and China, Noyon Lanka uses the latest in technology to expand its capabilities beyond lace, enabling a diverse range of intimate wear, and activewear products, whilst offering breakthrough innovations such as the 100% natural dye solution – Planetones to the world’s leading brands.

Husni Salieh shared insights into the company’s future, “As Noyon moves forward, our focus will broaden beyond lace, to become the most innovative warp knit solutions provider to the world. We are excited to lead the way in innovative, sustainable manufacturing, while supporting the communities in which we operate.”

The event served not only to celebrate Noyon’s Lanka’s significant ‘20-year milestone in Sri Lanka but also to honour the 105-year legacy of the Noyon brand which was acquired by Noyon Lanka last year.