CAHM – 7 Star Junior Chef Competition Season 01’s Grand Finale

The Grand Finale of the CAHM – 7 Star Junior Chef Competition – Season 01 was successfully held on 9th of May at the CAHM premises, SLIIT Main Campus, Malabe, celebrating the talent, creativity and passion of young aspiring chefs from across Sri Lanka.

Organised by the Colombo Academy of Hospitality Management (CAHM) at SLIIT, with 7 Star by Serendib Flour Mills as Title Sponsor, the national-level competition provided students aged 13 to 16 with a platform to explore culinary arts, gain practical exposure and discover future opportunities in hospitality.

The Colombo Academy of Hospitality Management (CAHM), Sri Lanka’s largest private hospitality, foods, tourism, and events education provider, in partnership with the William Angliss Institute, (RTO – 3045) Australia and operating within the SLIIT premises Malabe. Through this partnership, CAHM delivers internationally competitive training in culinary arts, offering students an exceptional learning experience that prepares them for opportunities in Sri Lanka and on the global stage.

The competition’s journey began with an encouraging islandwide response, attracting over 5,000 inquiries from aspiring participants, parents and schoolteachers, with over 1,400 applications submitted. Following a careful evaluation process, 204 applicants were shortlisted for the competition, progressing through structured rounds that offered hands-on culinary exposure, industry insights and preparatory guidance, before the final 10 contestants were selected to compete at the Grand Finale.

Following several competitive rounds, 10 finalists secured their places at the Grand Finale. The finalists were Bareerah Bariq of Muslim Ladies College Colombo 04, Nikhel Venuk Elisha of St Joseph’s College Colombo 10, Anooshka Vigneswaran of Girls High School Kandy, Prabhasha Muthubhashini Gunawardhana of Kalutara Balika Vidyalaya, Shamha Nazim of Ilma International Girls’ School Colombo 05, Sithuki Siyansa Methsandi of Buddhist Ladies College Colombo 07, Sandaruwani Nisansala of Moratu Maha Vidyalaya Senuth Insanda of Nalanda College Colombo 10, Pinidu Senuranga Fernando of Boys’ Model School Malabe, and Poorna Bandara Tennakoon of Royal International School Kurunegala.

Resilience amidst geopolitical headwinds: Sampath Bank posts Rs 6.2 bn PAT in Q1 2026

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.