ALFT Packaging’s excellence celebrated at Nestlé Lanka’s ‘Connect@Nest’24’

From left: Nestlé Director – Corporate Affairs and Communications Ruwan Welikala, ALFT Managing Director Chathura Jayatissa, ALFT Chairman Lakshman De Fonseka and Nestlé Managing Director Bernhard Stefan

ALFT Packaging, as a dynamic presence in the flexible packaging industry, has been honoured with a Special Award as ‘Distinguished Business Partnership’ in the Packaging Category by Nestlé Lanka. The prestigious recognition was presented to ALFT at the recent Nestlé Procurement “Connect@Nest’24” Business Partner Felicitation event.

The award acknowledges the long-standing and successful business relationship between ALFT Packaging and Nestlé Lanka, highlighting ALFT’s commitment to excellence and innovation in the Flexible Packaging industry.

In addition to the main honours, ALFT Packaging also received a Certificate of Innovation Excellence, recognising the company’s promising potential as true business partners for Nestlé Lanka and a Certificate of Appreciation, further emphasising the valued partnership and contribution to Nestlé’s promise of “Good Food, Good Life”.

ALFT Packaging Chairman Lakshman De Fonseka said, “We are deeply honoured to receive the Distinguished Business Partnership award from Nestlé Lanka and other awards. It reflects our dedication to providing top-tier flexible packaging solutions and strong commitment to building lasting business relationships. The recognition motivates us to continue innovating and exceeding our partners’ expectations.”

The award celebrates ALFT Packaging’s continued achievements and sets the stage for collaboration and growth with Nestlé Lanka and other industry leaders.

Kanchana Fernando, Nestlé Lanka Director – Supply chain added, “We value the partnership we have with ALFT as one of our main business partners, as they consistently set new standards delivering solutions that cater to the evolving needs of our customers. We look forward to continued collaboration and growth with ALFT.”

Renowned for revolutionising the industry, ALFT Packaging has consistently set new standards by delivering solutions that cater to evolving customer needs, leveraging local expertise with global benchmarks. Founded five years ago, ALFT Packaging excels in offering globally competitive, cost-effective, and innovative packaging solutions, upheld by a commitment to quality.

The company operates a state-of-the-art, 200,000 sq. ft facility built to Japanese standards and equipped with advanced German machinery. Being the only BRC “AA” certified Flexible Packaging complex in Sri Lanka, the plant includes temperature-controlled storage, a solvent storage facility and an in-house prepress facility.

Today, ALFT Packaging is celebrated among global clients, serving over 100 brands with pioneering Gravure and CI Flexo printing and packaging solutions, providing a significant edge over competitors.