Marikkar exposes Wickremesinghe’s pretence of contesting 2024 Presidential poll

Slams alleged UNP executive committee announcement on election dates for 2024

Says however announcement has confirmed President will not contest in upcoming Presidential election

Claims President is merely pretending he will contest to avoid State employees defying his instructions

Samagi Jana Balawegaya (SJB) MP S.M. Marikkar yesterday slammed an announcement allegedly made by the United National Party (UNP) executive committee on the upcoming elections scheduled for 2024. He said the announcement has confirmed that President Ranil Wickremesinghe will not be a candidate in the upcoming Presidential election.

Addressing a press conference at the Opposition leader’s office in Colombo, Marikkar accused the President’s Media Unit (PMD) of planting the news supposedly from the UNP executive committee declaring that President Ranil Wickremesinghe has decided to have the Presidential Election in September 2024 and he will contest as an Independent candidate.

“It further said the President has decided to have the Parliamentary elections in January 2025 and the Provincial Council Elections in March 2025,” the MP noted.

“How can the UNP executive committee determine the timing of elections in Sri Lanka? That is the responsibility of the Election Commission of Sri Lanka. Subsequently, it is the duty of the President elected in the Presidential election to decide when the Parliamentary elections will be held. A President who was appointed and lacks a mandate cannot make this decision,” he said.

The MP noted that not only does the President lack a mandate, but every member representing the UNP executive committee were unsuccessful candidates in the previous election.

He alleged that Wickremesinghe will not contest the Presidential election but has issued this statement as State sector employees will not follow his directives if it is disclosed that he will not be a candidate.

“Until the last moment, he is merely pretending he will contest. How can a person who is unable to go among the public contest in the Presidential election?” Marikkar questioned. He said even if the Sri Lanka Podujana Peramuna (SLPP) hands over its party’s candidate to Wickremesinghe, the President will not contest as his defeat is inevitable.