HNB clinches joint victory at ACCA Sustainability Reporting Awards 2023

Sri Lanka’s leading private sector bank, HNB PLC, proudly announced its recognition as a joint winner in the banking category for Excellence in Sustainability Reporting at the prestigious Sri Lanka Sustainability Awards, organized by the Association of Chartered Certified Accountants (ACCA) Sri Lanka, a news release from HNB said.

HNB’s Annual Report for 2022 ‘Built for Resilience’ won Gold for its excellence in transparent reporting, accountability, and deploying responsible practices in sustainability, it said.

“This achievement highlights our commitment to not only meeting but exceeding the highest standards of environmental, social, and governance practices. We are immensely proud to be recognized by the ACCA for our efforts in sustainability reporting, as it reinforces our resolve to continue leading the way in sustainable banking practices in Sri Lanka,” said HNB, Managing Director/CEO, Jonathan Alles.

Aligned with the International Reporting Framework and Global Reporting Initiative (GRI) standards, HNB’s Annual Report provides a holistic view into the Bank’s social and environmental impacts. It also underscores HNB’s continuing efforts to integrate sustainable development and responsible banking into HNB’s corporate agenda and operations.

ACCA’s annual awards spotlight businesses excelling in environmental, social, or sustainability reporting. HNB was honored for meeting ACCA’s criteria, showing a deep understanding of its corporate context, outlining key environmental impacts, and demonstrating a strong commitment to environmental policies. The bank’s annual report showcased its environmental targets, objectives, and detailed reporting policies, reflecting a comprehensive approach to sustainability disclosure.

Additionally, HNB was ranked among the World’s Top 1,000 Banks list compiled by the prestigious UK-based Banker Magazine for the sixth consecutive year in 2022, in addition to being crowned the Best Market Leader in Trade Finance Services and Best Service Provider in Trade Finance for the 5th year at the Euromoney Awards 2024.

BP de Silva Singapore displays convergence of gemstones, design, and craftsmanship

HNB celebrates 135-year legacy of partnerships and progress with commemorative stamp launch

Declaration of attractive dividends by banking sector counters rejuvenates bourse

HNB unveils the future of rapid customer onboarding in partnership with Lime by LinearSix

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.