When power prevails over the law

Nary a day passes without a new headline about a controversy stirred by the JVP-led NPP government. It was reported yesterday that a civil society outfit had lodged a complaint with the Judicial Services Commission against NPP MP and attorney-at-law Lakmali Hemachandra’s statement, at a recent Thimbirigasyaya Divisional Development Committee meeting, that she had asked a state official, described in some quarters as a police officer, not to carry out a court order regarding the eviction of a group of unauthorised settlers from state land in Narahenpita. She reportedly said an agreement had already been reached not to proceed with the court order in question. It is not just an instance of political overreach; it is a blatant act of political interference with a judicial decision, which, in our book, amounts to contempt of court and must be treated as such.

Several prominent persons, including politicians, have been jailed for contempt of court. It was only last month that former Controller General of Immigration and Emigration Harsha Ilukpitiya was sentenced to two years in prison by the Supreme Court for contempt of court; while in office, he did not comply with a Supreme Court order that suspended a Cabinet decision to privatise an electronic visa issuance process during the previous government. Obviously, he committed that offence at the behest of the government leaders of the day, but they got off scot-free. Ilukpitiya’s predicament should serve as a warning to those who violate the law according to the whims and fancies of politicians.

What the NPP has done in Narahenpita—asking the police not to implement a court order against a group of people unlawfully occupying state land—is in sharp contrast to what it did, last month, in Yakkala where it took the law into its own hands and threw out a group of FSP members from their party office in full view of the police, claiming that it was doing so in keeping with a court order. The police unquestioningly went by the NPP’s claim and dispersed a group of FSP protesters near the disputed party office, but later the Gampaha Additional Magistrate ordered the Yakkala Police to evict the JVP members who were forcibly occupying the place and keep it out of bounds for both parties to the dispute until the Gampaha District Court determined its ownership. The police must be made to explain why they did not arrest the mob led by some government politicians for storming the office and making a false claim. The NPP government is lucky that the current Opposition’s bark is worse than its bite.

Is the JVP/NPP emulating its predecessors whom it condemned for taking the law into their own hands and undermining the legal and judicial process. One of its main election promises was to restore the rule of law. But the Opposition says the police have refrained from arresting a minister and a deputy minister charged with forging a deed, a criminal offence. The police float like a butterfly and sting like a bee when they deal with ordinary public and Opposition politicians, but they float like a bee and sting like a butterfly when the culprits happen to be members of the JVP/NPP government and their kith and kin.

The JVP was able to secure state power because the people were utterly disillusioned with the previous governments which became highly unpopular due to corruption, abuse of power, economic mismanagement and interference with the rule of law. The J. R. Jayewardene government had the houses of the Supreme Court judges stoned in 1983 in retaliation for some judicial decisions that went against it. That regime also sought to impeach the then Chief Justice Neville Samarakoon on some flimsy pretext as he did not bend to its will. The Rajapaksa government wrongfully impeached Chief Justice Dr. Shirani Bandaranayake, as some judicial decisions under her watch were not to its liking. The SLPP-UNP government under Ranil Wickremesinghe’s presidency did not allocate funds for the local government elections in defiance of a Supreme Court order.

The JVP/NPP rode on the crest of a massive wave of public anger to achieve its goal of savouring power; it promised to upend what it described as a rotten system forthwith and usher in a new political culture. Most of all, it pledged to restore the rule of law as a national priority. But its promises remain unfulfilled, and the old system prevails. Unless the NPP government makes good on its key promises, especially restoring the rule of law and ensuring that everyone is equal before the law, it may be overtaken by the very forces that propelled it to power.

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.