A case study on the functioning of Govt.and fraudulent school admissions

It is interesting how on occasions, a relatively trivial incident can take on large significance and waste the time and attention of several, even senior, public servants. One such incident was President Premadasa’s visit to St. Bernadette’s College, Polgahawela to preside over a prize-giving.

The well established system in the Ministry was that invitations to the President to preside at school prize-givings were referred by the Presidential Secretariat to the Ministry for advice. The Ministry, taking into account all relevant factors including the importance of the President’s time, recommended acceptance or rejection. If the President accepted the Ministry recommendation to participate, the Presidential Secretariat kept the Ministry informed of such participation.

It was then the duty of the Ministry to ensure that either the Minister or a Project or the State Minister and a senior official attended the function. This was in addition to anyone attending from the Provincial Ministry of Education. The President required this attendance, in case he needed to check on any facts or figures.

In the case of St. Bernadette’s the President found when he went there, that there was no representation at all from the Ministry. The prize-giving was on a Saturday, and there was a big splash in the Sunday papers about the President’s attendance and speech. When I went to office on Monday, I did not suspect that there was anything amiss. In the early part of the morning I was chairing a meeting when I received a call from Mr. K.H.J. Wijayadasa, Secretary to the President.

From his tone it was evident that he was both irritated and exasperated. He inquired as to why no Minister or official from the Ministry was present at St. Bernadette’s on Saturday. He said that the President was furious and that he was having no peace. Every few minutes, he was telephoning and disturbing him. “I came today with the intention of finishing some important work in the morning. I now find I can’t do a thing,” Mr. Wijayadasa complained with obvious frustration.

He wanted an immediate report phoned in to him. That was the end of my important work too. I was also working to a tight schedule and wanted to accomplish much that morning. Everything now had to be abandoned to chase after a matter of no consequence at all to the country. Inquiries showed that the Ministry had no record of a request from the Presidential Secretariat. My senior Additional Secretary, Mrs. Kamala Wickremasinghe, a diligent, competent and responsible officer who dealt with this area, assured me that she had received no intimation at all of this Prize-giving.

I had no recollection of anything passing my table either. We were trying to get to the bottom of this mystery. Mr. Wijayadasa kept on ringing, getting more and more irritated because the President was ringing him demanding an explanation. This was now turning out to be a minor nightmare, fortified with something of a comic element.

By now several senior officers had suspended all other work and were engaged in detective work, trying to find out what happened. I was totally immobilized coping with Mr. Wijayadasa demanding answers on one side and chasing after my officers on the other. Mr. Wijayadasa was immobilized because the President was not allowing him any peace of mind to attend to his work.

Eventually, after almost two tense and unpleasant hours we discovered the unsuspecting culprit. It was the Minister (Mr. Athulathmudali). What had happened was that some Members of Parliament, representing the area had met the Minister in his room in Parliament and had obtained the Minister’s hand-written approval on a note submitted to him. The Minister kept no copy. Therefore, nothing passed down to the office.

The MPs concerned would have then dealt with the President’s personal staff. Therefore, neither Mr. Wijayadasa nor his officials knew anything. We didn’t know either. This entire episode was not only an example of what fairly frequently happens in government where matters of no great national consequence have to be given urgent attention at the expense of extremely important matters.

It was also a demonstration of the importance of proper information flows, documentation and lines of communication in working a system. If for some reason, the system is short circuited, disaster could follow. That is why the proper keeping of records in a civil service is vitally important.

One of the many important issues that had to be addressed was the one of providing computers to schools. When we went into the Ministry we found that there was a Cabinet decision to provide computers to schools, principally to be used by “A” level pupils. This immediately struck me as being impractical. Children grappling with four difficult subjects at the “A” level in an environment of intense competition to enter our Universities were already overwhelmed with their studies.

The reality was that a great many of them also attended various tuition classes during their spare time. They were not required to use computers as a part of their normal work. It was therefore extremely unlikely that they had any time or energy left to follow instructions on the use of computers, and thereafter put in the hands on practice that was necessary.

I decided to probe this matter. It came as no surprise to me that things were happening in just the way I had imagined. Some schools had computers given to them for use in “A” level classes. But there was no time to conduct classes. The computers were therefore safely locked up! The Ministry had a Computer Advisory Council. I immediately re-constituted it and re-activated it.

On it I had persons of the calibre of Professor Samaranayake of the Colombo University and at the time Chairman of CINTEC; Professor Induruwe of Moratuwa University; Professor Thilakaratne of the Kelaniya University; and other well-known computer academics and professionals. The Council totally agreed with my diagnosis of the problem.

I froze the purchase of computers under the Cabinet decision and appointed a subcommittee of the Computer Advisory Council to study and make recommendations as to the use of computers in schools. I kept the Minister informed. He heartily approved of the action taken. The sub-committee report which was handed over within about four months recommended the setting up of computer centres in strategically identified schools, catering not only to those schools, but to a cluster of surrounding schools.

They also made the important recommendation that the computer classes and courses should be targeted towards those children who had finished sitting for their “O” level and “A” level examinations, and had nothing to do pending results. These recommendations were accepted by the Minister. We then worked on curricula, duration of courses, equipping the centres, training of teachers and instructors and other relevant matters.

I particularly insisted that the courses provided at these centres should not be “dead end” courses leading to nowhere. I wanted them structured in such a way that those successfully completing them could obtain the necessary exemptions and credits, if they wished to pursue their studies further and sit for national and international examinations. This was done.

We started three pilot projects, including in the Monaragala and Matara districts. The enthusiasm of both parents and children was very great. In one school centre the parents voluntarily built a shed with their own funds to shelter children waiting for one batch to come out, in order to go in and start their own classes. The number of these centres gradually grew, and by the middle of 1990, they totaled around 14 catering to thousands of children.

As we proceeded there was another issue that caused me concern. Being a large Ministry, the flow of files, paper and reports reaching me was very heavy. Given my various responsibilities, the number of meetings, conferences and tender boards I had to attend also took much time. At a certain point I began to realize that most if not all of my time was spent on attending to and clearing up matters that the system threw up. There was no serious thinking going on in a coherent and co-ordinated way about quality improvement in the system, which would also have to lead to a close scrutiny of the system as it existed and a questioning of the assumptions on which it rested.

Some of this did take place in the fora of discussion on assistance to education by institutions such as the World Bank and the Asian development Bank. Multidisciplinary teams from these institutions and others sat with us at a number of meetings and at discussions which went on for hours. These were helpful, due to the complexity and variety of matters that were raised. They helped immensely to clarify our own thinking on a number of important matters such as curricula, teacher training, examinations, book development, proper costing and so on.

But here again, we were not entirely in control of the agenda. We were reacting to external impulses. I therefore thought that it was very important for us to establish internal control of the education agenda and to create some space for independent thinking among ourselves. I therefore decided to establish in the Ministry what I called an “Education Development Cell,” with officers being hand picked for their knowledge, experience, attitudes and capacity to think. I deliberately kept the numbers small, because itis difficult to have meaningful discussions in a large body.

The numbers varied from 10 to 12. I also had to find a suitable time to meet, given the pressure on my own time. We settled on 5 p.m. although on some days I was unable to start the proceedings before 5.30 p.m. or so. To the great credit of this group consisting of some of my additional Secretaries and senior educationists they participated with great interest, diligence and patience. On some days even when the time was 7.30 p.m. there was no impatience shown, and concentration did not flag.

They, as well as in my personal experience, hundreds of others gave the lie to the broad and irresponsible assertion that public servants are “clock watchers” and that because they had security of tenure and a regular salary, they shirked and did not work. There are of course such individuals as is bound to happen in a large system. But to accuse the public service as a whole in such a manner was demonstrably unwarranted and even reckless.

The discussions we had in this group consisted mainly of examining the quality, relevance and reach of the numerous programmes and the exploration of possibilities of improvement, through appropriate amendments, extensions or sometimes even replacements. The group also studied issues relating to regular and relevant training, cost savings, resourcing, improving systems and so on. Emphasis was also laid on the modalities of converting decisions made by us into the stream of actual implementation followed by monitoring feed-back and further assessment. The meetings were both productive and interesting, characterized by spirited discussions and much good humour, and were looked forward to by all.

One of the salutary instructions that was issued by Minister Lalith Athulathmudali related to admission to schools in year one. There was tremendous pressure on the Ministry and on principals

of schools from parents as well as from various other sources including political forces to admit children to the more recognized and popular schools in particular. Pressure was applied through

letters, telephone calls, repeated personal visits and so on. All these constituted a significantly disturbing factor to all those at the receiving end who included the Minister and the Secretary.

The Minister therefore, issued an order that no one in the Ministry should intervene in an admission. No officer in the Ministry was to issue any letters, or in any other way bring to bear pressure on principals in the area of admission. Principals were free to follow strictly, the prevailing circular instructions. Any parent or other party seriously aggrieved with the decision of a principal could seek a remedy in the courts, after the Appeals Board procedure was exhausted. There was to be no administrative interference whatsoever.

I was therefore quite taken aback when the Principal of Nalanda College, Mr. Dharma Gunasinghe, rang me one day and rather hesitantly and apologetically informed me that in respect of my “note” to him, he had managed to enter one child to year one. He was however finding some difficulties in entering the second, but would try his best to admit him also. I immediately said “Surely, aren’t you aware that we don’t interfere in these matters at all? I have sent you no letters at all.”

Mr. Gunasinghe then said, “Sir, your signature is on this letter.” I asked him “How do you know it is my signature?” Then only did he begin to realize what had happened. I was about to leave the Ministry to attend a meeting. I instructed him to send under confidential cover and through a reliable messenger the letter concerned, to my office immediately. I then told my personal assistant that I was expecting an urgent hand delivered letter from the principal of Nalanda College, and that he should take over this letter and keep it securely unopened until I got back from my meeting.

I then telephoned my Senior Additional Secretary Mrs. Wickremasinghe and to her evident shock narrated what had happened, and instructed her to personally call the Deputy Inspector General of Police, CID and request him to send an officer immediately to the Ministry. I said that I would be back within one and a half hours after my meeting. When I came back a CID officer was awaiting me. I looked at the letter. It was typed on a Ministry letterhead with the rubber seal “Secretary Ministry of Education and Higher Education,” impressed at the bottom. Just above was a very badly forged signature. The perpetrator had not taken the trouble to make any study of my signature.

The signature was “Dharmasiri Pieris” I never sign like that except in writing to personal friends. In fact my normal signature was an indecipherable oddity which afforded some amusement to my friends, to the point of some of them asking, “Is that a signature?” To this my customary reply was “Anything can be a signature as long as one is consistent.” The CID inspector had not been idle until I came. He brought the rubber stamp from my office and impressed it on a piece of paper. He then showed the paper to me and said “See here Sir, your office seal has got wasted through use.”

The wastage was clearly visible. Some of the letters were not sharp or very clear. Then he pointed to the seal used on the forged letter. All the letters were fresh, bright and clear. “He has got a seal cut,” the inspector said. Thereupon, he recorded my statement and went on recording the statements of various others in my private office and the Ministry. Ultimately one of my office aides was arrested as well as the main culprit who was a conman who had been posing off as a Provincial Councilor and in that bogus capacity visiting the Ministry regularly in order to particularly deal with school admission matters.

He had come to see me as well, and looked a most plausible Provincial Councilor. The CID found that he had used my forged signature to admit four children to leading schools, including one child to a leading girls’ school. His fee had been Rs. 35,000 per child. When the parents inevitably would have negotiated for a reduction, he no doubt told them that a large part of it went to the Secretary.

The case came up before High Court Judge Colombo Mrs. Shirani Tilakawardena. On the first day the case couldn’t proceed because the State Counsel was not ready with all the reports, etc. He was roundly ticked off by the Judge. She then warned Counsel for the defense that she considered this an extremely serious case and that when the Examiner of Questioned Documents’ report came in, he should consider his clients plea very carefully.

The trial was then fixed for another day. On that day the accused pleaded guilty and received a suspended prison sentence of five years. Some of my colleagues in the Ministry thought that he should have spent some real time in jail. I was satisfied that he was caught and dealt with before much damage could be done. There only remained one other matter. What were we to do about the children who entered school through payment to this man.

After reflection and discussion also with the Minister, we decided not to do anything. We regarded the children concerned as victims or (beneficiaries?) of a process that was beyond them. We did not wish to cause them any trauma.

Why does the state threaten Its people with yet another anti-terror law?

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.