Demand for PSC acid test for govt.

Former Minister Prasanna Ranatunga was arrested by the Commission to Investigate Allegations of Bribery or Corruption, yesterday, for having caused a loss of Rs. 4.7 million to the state-owned Sri Lanka Insurance Corporation, while he was serving as the Minister of Tourism and Aviation. He was granted bail.

All those who have abused power, helped themselves to state funds and cut corrupt deals at the expense of the public must be made to face the full force of the law. After all, that is what the people have given the NPP an extraordinary mandate for.

There are very serious allegations against the leaders and members of the previous governments, and all of them must be probed thoroughly and the culprits prosecuted. However, such investigations, arrests and prosecutions must be free from politics. Most of all, the wheels of justice must not be made to turn at a politically determined pace, for justice must be neither delayed nor hurried, for it is believed that justice delayed is justice denied, and justice hurried is justice buried. It may be recalled that many cases hurriedly filed against politicians and their associates during the UNP-led Yahapalana government, which was backed by the JVP, collapsed.

The JVP-led NPP came to power, vowing to rid the country of bribery and corruption and abuse of power. So, it has a moral obligation to put its own house in order before making its political opponents face legal action for corruption, etc. Worryingly, quite a few allegations and complaints against some government members have not been investigated. On Tuesday, the Opposition pointed out in Parliament that its request for a Parliamentary Select Committee (PSC) to probe the questionable release of 323 red-flagged freight containers from the Colombo Port without Customs inspection in January 2025 had gone unheeded.

One should not be so naïve as to expect a PSC investigation to pave the way for the prosecution of those who mastermined the green-channeling of the aforesaid containers; a PSC, if appointed, will be packed with NPP MPs. However, the Opposition members will have an opportunity to question the Customs officers and others who released the containers without inspection, and make public their findings. It will not be possible to institute legal action against the culprits as long as the NPP stays in power. The NPP government has not even allowed a no-faith motion to be moved against Deputy Minister of Defence Major General (Retd.) Aruna Jayasekera, a former Eastern Province Security Forces Commander, over some matters related to the Easter Sunday carnage. It has thus made a mockery of its much-flaunted commitment to upholding accountability.

Besides the container controversy, there are other serious allegations against the NPP government, such as irregularities in coal and rice imports. It has also drawn severe criticism for having manipulated tender criteria in a bid to procure as many as 1,775 double cab pickup trucks through a company of its choice. The Opposition has called upon the government to scrap the vehicle tender.

President Anura Kumara Dissanayake has offered to allocate some of the pickup trucks to be imported to the MPs. The Opposition has turned down his offer out of hand. Before last year’s presidential election, the NPP declared that the MPs would have to use public transport if it formed a government. In fact, even in some affluent countries, the members of Parliament are not provided with official vehicles. In Sweden, only the Prime Minister is entitled to an official car, and all other members of Parliament, including the Speaker, are given only bus and train passes. The NPP ought to follow the Swedish example.

The legislators of a country struggling to revive its economy and pay back its foreign debt must make sacrifices. The NPP MPs during their election campaigns pledged to practise austerity and share in the people’s suffering. JVP/NPP stalwart Sunil Handunnetti went so far as to promise that the NPP politicians, including the President and the Prime Minister would travel in buses and trains just like the ordinary people! The government should cancel the pickup truck tender forthwith.

If the NPP has nothing to hide, it should stop trying to stonewall the parliamentary process to scuttle the Opposition’s efforts to have a PSC appointed to probe the container controversy.

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.