The Kingsbury PLC obtains enjoining order against Wimal Weerawansa

The District Court of Colombo has recently issued an enjoining order against the former Minister and Member of Parliament Wimal Weerawansa on an application preferred by The Kingsbury PLC.

The Kingsbury PLC set out in the plaint that, it is one of the most prominent and well-known luxury hotels in Sri Lanka having a long-standing presence in the hospitality industry in Colombo and a reputation within both Sri Lanka and internationally. The plaint further included that the company’s board of directors consists of esteemed individuals in the country. It was further set out that The Kingsbury was originally constructed in the early 1970s and opened in or about the year 1973 as the Ceylon Inter-Continental, which at the time was the first five-star hotel in Colombo The hotel was rebranded and reopened in or around January 2013 following a major refurbishment and development under the name “The Kingsbury”. It was also set out that the reputation and goodwill attached to The Kingsbury constitutes a valuable commercial asset of The Kingsbury PLC and form and integral part of its business operations.

The Kingsbury PLC  in its Plaint stated that, against this backdrop, Wimal Weerawansa, in or around February 2026, directly and/or indirectly referred to the Kingsbury PLC through various social media platforms and made statements of a defamatory nature. The Kingsbury PLC further alleged that Wimal Weerawansa, either expressly or by innuendo, identified the Kingsbury PLC and, through the publication of such defamatory statements, damaged the reputation of The Kingsbury PLC. In particular, it is alleged that Wimal Weerawansa disseminated a video containing the said statements across several social media platforms, thereby causing further harm to the Company’s reputation.

Following Weerawansa’s failure to respond to a Letter of Demand from The Kingsbury PLC  seeking Rs. 1 billion in damages and requiring him to cease and desist from his wrongful conduct, the Company instituted proceedings in the District Court of Colombo and upon support, the District Judge of Colombo issued an Enjoining Order restraining the Defendant from republishing, rebroadcasting, publicising, distributing or  circulating  the said video.

The Plaintiff Kingsbury PLC was represented by M. A. Sumanthiran President’s Counsel with Lakshmanan Jeyakumar Attorney-at-Law and Gayani Wickramarathne Attorney-at-Law instructed by R. Moahan Balendra Attorney-at-Law.