‘TOKYO SUPER, the only cement brand to earn SUPERBANDS status’

TOKYO SUPER Cement, flagship brand of the Tokyo Cement Group, has been awarded the coveted SUPERBRANDS status for 2025 in recognition of its outstanding commitment to quality, innovation, and performance excellence. The title was conferred to TOKYO SUPER at the gala awards ceremony held recently to celebrate the impressive brand stories of the strongest and most valuable brands in the market.

Manufactured to meet the highest quality and performance standards, TOKYO SUPER has established itself as a game changer in the construction industry. Reaching consumers as TOKYO SUPER OPC, the county’s most popular cement brand, and TOKYO SUPER BHC, the greenest cement in the market, TOKYO SUPER is the only Cement brand among the elite set of SUPERBRANDS 2025. Furthermore, TOKYO SUPER lends its trusted reputation to a comprehensive portfolio of innovative dry-mortar products. Spanning across waterproofers, wall plasters, mortars, and market-leading tile adhesives, TOKYO SUPER presents a comprehensive range of advanced construction solutions.

Ranked among the country’s most respected brands, TOKYO SUPER is marketed by the Tokyo Cement Group, a company intricately linked with the nation’s progress. The SUPERBRANDS recognition is the latest addition to a long list of prestigious accolades earned by the Group over 44 years of reshaping the country’s construction landscape. Whilst being Sri Lanka’s only public-listed cement manufacturer, Tokyo Cement Group is the market leader in cement, ready-mix concrete, and cement-based dry mortar products. Having supplied high-quality cement and concrete for iconic constructions and landmark infrastructure projects Tokyo Cement Group has cemented its market leadership as the trusted partner in Nation-building.

SUPERBRANDS Sri Lanka is the local representative of London-based Superbrands Worldwide, the world’s largest independent arbiter of branding operating across 90 countries.

LOLC Holdings, PickMe and Browns EV collaborate to accelerate Sri Lanka’s transition to inclusive electric mobility

Continuing investor optimism over Q3 corporate results helps retain CSE’s glow

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.