CDB and Hayleys Mobility partner to drive customer-friendly vehicle financing

Citizens Development Business Finance PLC (CDB) signed a Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) with Hayleys Mobility Limited, the mobility arm of Hayleys Fentons Limited, introducing exclusive financial solutions customised for a wide range of electric and hybrid vehicles on June 16, 2026. This partnership delivers greater convenience and flexibility to customers, offering tailored financial solutions, flexible repayment tenors and exclusive insurance benefits. Customers of Hayleys Mobility will also enjoy lifetime annual fee waivers on CDB credit cards in addition to a smoother, faster financing process when purchasing vehicles.

Speaking on the partnership, CDB Managing Director Mahesh Nanayakkara said, “At CDB, our journey towards Net Zero by 2030 has spurred us to create value-driven financial solutions that empower customers. This partnership with Hayleys Mobility reflects our commitment to delivering convenience, innovation, and exclusive benefits to vehicle buyers across Sri Lanka. Together, we are shaping a seamless financing experience that supports sustainable mobility and enhances customer satisfaction.”

Hasith Premathilake, Managing Director, Hayleys Fentons Limited, stated, “This partnership reflects how Hayleys Fentons continues to build a future-ready ecosystem, bringing together engineering capability, charging infrastructure and structured financial access to serve Sri Lankan customers. We are also encouraged that CDB has already come on board with Hayleys Solar, reinforcing its commitment to sustainable energy adoption. Through this partnership with Hayleys Mobility, we are continuing that green momentum by extending sustainable solutions from renewable energy to cleaner, smarter mobility.

SLT-MOBITEL ‘Sadaham Sabendiyava’ brings devotees closer to the spirit of Poson

Union Assurance Suwamaga brings free diabetes screening to thousands during Poson pilgrimage

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.