HNB becomes Official Banking Partner of the Royal–Thomian

HNB PLC, Sri Lanka’s leading private sector bank, has come on board for the first time as the Official Banking Partner of the 147th edition of the iconic “Battle of the Blues”, the historic Royal–Thomian cricket encounter between Royal College, Colombo and S. Thomas’ College, Mt. Lavinia.

Commenting on the partnership, HNB’s Managing Director / CEO, Damith Pallewatte stated, “At HNB, we are honored to mark our inaugural partnership with the Battle of the Blues, one of Sri Lanka’s most celebrated school cricketing traditions. HNB indeed has as a great connection with Cricket as the sponsor of 1st Test Cricket match played Sri Lanka Vs. England 1982. Our support for school cricket highlights a deep commitment to nurturing young talent and inspiring a lifelong passion for the game. Through flagship initiatives such as the Battle of the Blues, we aim to empower the next generation of cricketing communities, while preserving the rich heritage and spirit of Sri Lankan school cricket.”

The three-day encounter for the Rt. Hon. D. S. Senanayake Memorial Shield will be played from March 12 to 14 at the SSC Grounds, Colombo. Recognised as the second-longest uninterrupted school cricket series in the world, the Royal–Thomian stands as a living testament to tradition, sportsmanship, and brotherhood. The Mustangs Trophy one-day encounter will follow on March 28 under lights at the SSC, adding modern energy to this timeless contest.

HNB’s partnership with the Royal–Thomian represents a significant milestone in the Bank’s sports marketing journey. Aligning for the first time with Sri Lanka’s most iconic “Big Match,” HNB strengthens its footprint within the school cricketing ecosystem a platform that has produced generations of national heroes and global ambassadors for the game.

HNB will enhance the Royal- Thomian experience by introducing seamless digital and cashless banking solutions at the venue, offering greater convenience through mobile and online banking access cashless payments card based benefits and engaging activations.

Ceylinco Life wins unrivaled global recognition with 12th straight World Finance award

IDL emerges champion at CIPM Great HR Quiz 2026 on debut appearance

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.