Celebratory launch of JITF’s 15th edition

The much-anticipated Jaffna International Trade Fair (JITF) is set to mark its 15th edition from January 24 to 26, 2025, at the Muttraweli Grounds, in the once war- torn Jaffna peninsula. Organized annually since 2002, the JITF has steadily grown into one of Sri Lanka’s largest trade exhibitions, serving as a vital link between northern and southern businesses and communities, especially following the end of the country’s 30-year civil war.

Organised by Lanka Exhibition and Conference Services (Pvt) Ltd. (LECS) in association with the Chamber of Commerce and Industry of Yarlpanam (CCIY), the JITF has grown significantly since its inception in 2002, becoming a dynamic hub where industry leaders, SMEs, and emerging entrepreneurs connect.

LECS Chief Operating Officer Husnie Rauf, speaking to The Island Financial Review said that the JITF has significantly impacted the Jaffna region by introducing a wide range of products and services that had long been inaccessible to the local population.

“This three-day exhibition offers a unique opportunity for residents to source everything from household goods to industrial supplies, educational resources, and more under one roof. The trade fair has become an annual event eagerly anticipated by locals, who look forward to the diverse opportunities it brings to their community,” he added.

He also noted that through its years of operation, the JITF has facilitated numerous success stories of business growth and collaboration. The fair has encouraged many southern entrepreneurs to expand their operations into the North, resulting in new ventures, mergers, and collaborations that have revitalized local industries.

He added: “Notable developments have included the establishment of sourcing hubs for agriculture, collection factories for vegetables and onions, and the growth of hospitality infrastructure. At the start of the JITF’s journey, Jaffna had limited accommodation options for visitors, but the exhibition has since created demand that has fostered the development of hotels, restaurants, transportation, and logistics services.”

He also said that the 2025 edition of the JITF promises to be the largest yet, with more than 350 stalls and a strong list of 23 sponsors, including DIMO as a Platinum sponsor for the second consecutive year. The level of participation speaks to the fair’s success and the value it brings to the businesses involved.

This year’s event will showcase numerous new products and services, he said, including exciting innovations from DIMO and other participating companies. Residents of Jaffna can expect an array of new offerings, from advanced paints to cutting-edge household products that are typically available in Colombo, thus providing them with unparalleled access to the latest industry developments.

Sustainable Development Council of Sri Lanka engages in current global discourses relating to Sustainable Development

Sri Lanka’s global competitiveness at risk: The economic cost of cargo clearance delays

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.