Geoffrey Bawa Design Store and December Design Market

Central to Geoffrey Bawa’s practice was his emphasis on local craftsmanship and materials. The late architect once said, “The contribution of the makers, particularly the older carpenters and masons who are passionate about what they do, is equal to or more, in some cases than ours.”

The Geoffrey Bawa Trust continues to engage with Sri Lankan artisans and makers through its design store, which functions as an extension of the Trust’s mission since 1982: to advance the fields of art, architecture, and ecology. The store began with a collection of merchandise released in conjunction with the 2019 Bawa 100 centennial before expanding to an online presence in 2020 during the pandemic lockdowns.

The Geoffrey Bawa Design Store offers a selection of thoughtfully-designed products reflecting the architect’s reverence for local craftsmanship and sustainable materials. When developing new products, the curatorial team identifies small and medium-sized enterprises based around the country who make innovative use of materials from the island. The team then works with these makers to create a unique item that draws inspiration from Bawa’s practice—including his collection of objects and his attitude to design—while reflecting high-quality craftsmanship and sustainability.

In addition to its own products, the Geoffrey Bawa Trust supports local craft through an annual holiday design market. The Trust’s third annual December Design Market will host Sri Lankan small businesses across creative disciplines including textiles, ceramics, and more on 7th December, 2024 between 10:00 a.m. and 4:30 p.m. at the De Saram House, 61/6 Ward Place, Colombo 07.

Upcoming merchandise collections are currently in development, and stores will soon open at Lunuganga and in the Geoffrey Bawa Trust’s new Colombo office on Horton Place. The Geoffrey Bawa Design Store continues to expand its product range and is always seeking new opportunities for collaboration and merchandise development. To view the full collection of products available in the design store or make a purchase, visit the online shop at geoffreybawa.myshopify.com.

High-level business delegation from SGCCI visits Ceylon Chamber of Commerce

SLT-MOBITEL partners with EGUARDIAN to enhance Zoho accessibility for MSMEs in Sri Lanka

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.