Ravi Gamage named Maharaja Executive of the Year

The Capital Maharaja Group (CMG) named Ravi Gamage, General Manager Group Human Resources, as its Executive Of The Year for 2023. This much-coveted award has in previous years been won by many men and women who went on to play major roles in the Company, and in Sri Lanka’s economy as a whole.

The award was presented at CMG’s Annual Group Review and 44th Executive Of The Year Awards Ceremony, which was headed by Mr. Sashi Rajamahendran, Chairman of CMG, at Stein Studios in Ratmalana.

“The Executive of the Year, although given to an individual, is not an individual award. I stand on the shoulders of a thousand people in the CMG group. You have guided me and encouraged me, and together we make CMG move forward,” Ravi Gamage said.

The Executive Of The Year was chosen from among five finalists: M.M. Adhil (Head of Group Management Audit), M. Somapala (Director Sales Sirasa TV, MTV Channel), K. Athukorala (CEO, Harcros Chemicals Pvt Ltd), and R.S. Chaminda (Head – Dealer Sales, S-Lon Lanka Pvt Ltd).

The ‘RR Award’, named after CMG’s late Chairman Mr. R. Rajamahendran, was won by the team at S-Lon Lanka Pvt Ltd.

The ‘Achievers Awards’, for other notable accomplishments by CMG executives, were presented to Samith Basnayake (Manager Sirasa TV at Stein Studios), Chathuranga Senarath Dissanayake (Product Manager, S-Lon Lanka Pvt Ltd), Diloshan Peter (Electrical Engineer, Group Maintenance), Lakmala Kirindigala, (News Reporter, News 1st) and H.G.P. Sugathadheera (Finance Manager, Harcros Chemicals Pvt Ltd).

Dr. P. Nandalal Weerasinghe, the Governor of the Central Bank of Sri Lanka, was the Chief Guest at the occasion.

The ceremony was attended by a large number of notable VIPs, including several ambassadors, high commissioners and other members of the diplomatic community, and many of Sri Lanka’s prominent entrepreneurs.

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.