Committee hands over report on reforming presidential pardon process

Colombo, July 10 (Daily Mirror) - A committee appointed to review Sri Lanka's presidential pardon system has submitted a comprehensive report recommending a more systematic, fair and transparent framework for granting presidential pardons to prison inmates.

The report was officially handed over today (10) at the Ministry of Justice by the committee's Chairman, retired Supreme Court Justice S. Thurairaja, to Secretary to the Ministry of Justice and National Integration, President's Counsel Ayesha Jinasena.

The committee was appointed by the Cabinet of Ministers on June 25, 2025, to examine administrative shortcomings in the existing prison system and recommend reforms to the process of granting presidential pardons.

In preparing its recommendations, the committee reviewed existing laws, judicial precedents and the provisions of Article 34(1) of the Constitution, which governs the President's power to grant pardons.

The committee comprised retired Supreme Court Justice S. Thurairaja, Deputy Minister of Mass Media Dr. Kaushalya Ariyarathne, Additional Secretary to the Ministry of Justice and National Integration Piyumanthi Peiris, Additional Solicitor General Nerin Pulle, Senior Deputy Inspector General of Police (Attorney-at-Law) Asanga Karawita, Rehabilitation Bureau Chairperson Professor Wasantha Subasinghe, Specialist Dr. Chiththahari Abeyanayake, former Acting Commissioner of Prisons Nishan Dhanasinghe, Acting Commissioner General of Prisons Prasad Hemantha Kumara, Senior Assistant Secretary (Legal) Roshani Hettige and Senior Assistant Secretary Chandima Welikala.

According to the Ministry of Justice and National Integration, the recommendations are expected to support the government's wider prison reform programme by improving transparency in the presidential pardon process, addressing prison overcrowding and strengthening inmate rehabilitation.

The Ministry said the report will now be reviewed with a view to implementing the proposed reforms.