Sri Lanka to join US-led International Counter Ransomware Initiative

ECONOMYNEXT — Sri Lanka will accept an invitation  to join the US-led International Counter Ransomware Initiative (CRI), the government information department said.

The CRI was launched in 2021 as a common platform with a number of other countries for international coordination to eliminate ransomware.

“So far, [50] countries around the world and the European Union as well as the International Police have joined the initiative. Since Sri Lanka has recently faced various problems due to Ransomware, it has been recognised that it can benefit from joining the international anti-ransomware initiative,” the government statement said.

The cabinet of ministers has approved a joint proposal presented by President Ranil Wickremesinghe in his capacity as the Minister of Technology and Minister of Justice, Prison Affairs and Constitutional Reforms Wijeyadasa Rajapakshe to join the initiative.

Ransomware is software that denies users, whether individuals or organisations, access to a system or data until a ransom is paid. According to reports, ransomware impacts a range of industries every year, from schools and hospitals to critical infrastructure departments and the government. A Reuters report said ransomware attackers also increasingly steal sensitive data to extort victims.

During its latest International Counter Ransomware Initiative, held in October 2023, the Biden administration announced “significant” outcomes, including initiatives for sharing information on the ransomware attackers between counties.

“We’re committing to sharing bad wallets – wallets that are used to move illicit ransom funds – as well as a number of other related projects,” an official was quoted as saying.

“During the third CRI gathering, members reaffirmed our joint commitment to building our collective resilience to ransomware, cooperating to undercut the viability of ransomware and pursue the actors responsible, countering illicit finance that underpins the ransomware ecosystem, working with the private sector to defend against ransomware attacks, and continuing to cooperate internationally across all elements of the ransomware threat,” the White House said in a statement in November. (Colombo/Mar05/2024)