Associated Motorways fetes Castrol on its 125th Anniversary

Associated Motorways (Private) Limited, (AMW), the sole distributor of Castrol lubricants in Sri Lanka, joins in celebrating the 125th Anniversary of Castrol, a global leader in lubricants and part of the BP Group. This momentous occasion not only honours Castrol’s rich legacy but also highlights its continuous innovation and commitment to excellence in the lubricants industry.

Additionally, AMW and Castrol have also reached a very significant partnership milestone of 25-years. The milestone is a testament to the strength of this partnership, and the shared vision of delivering high-quality lubricant solutions to Sri Lankan customers.

Castrol commemorated its 125th year with the introduction of a bold new strategic vision entitled ‘Onward, Upward, Forward’ This forward-thinking approach is designed to meet the evolving needs of customers around the world accompanied by a special 125-year commemorative logo that will be prominently featured in events and sponsorships throughout 2024.

Castrol’s strategy focuses on three pillars: ‘Onward’ introduces advanced Castrol ON EV Fluids for electric vehicles while acknowledging the ongoing demand for internal combustion and hybrid vehicles. The company’s commitment to efficiency and innovation extends to all vehicle types. Under ‘Upward,’ Castrol supports industrial customers across sectors like automotive, robotics, and wind, offering services like ‘Oil as a Service’ with SKF to enhance efficiency and promote circularity. Finally, ‘Forward’ initiatives target growth in thermal management and data centre cooling solutions, emphasizing efficiency and sustainability for future success.

Ministry of Technology collaborates with Mastercard for DigiEcon Global Investment Summit 2024

Yamaha and AMW expect import ban on motorcycles will be lifted with economy stabilising

AMW aiming at expanding operations in SL; strategic plans to unfold

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.