Kamala maintains lead in all the polls, national and swing-states

The nomination process of the contenders for the election of the President of the United States on November 5 has now been finalized.The Republican nomination was concluded at the end of the Republican National Convention in June, 2024, when former President Donald J. Trump and Ohio Senator J.D. Vance were nominated to the Republican presidential ticket.

The nomination was preceded by a mysterious attempted “assassination” of Donald Trump, when he was speaking at an open-air campaign rally near Butler, Pennsylvania, a few days before the Convention. Trump was shot by a sniper with an AR 15 rifle, and escaped with a “graze” to his earlobe. President Biden has called for an independent investigation of this near-catastrophe, which is ongoing.

One would have thought that news about Trump’s near-death encounter, with the iconic photograph of an act of extreme defiance and courage, raising his arms, shouting the words, “Fight, Fight, Fight” against the line of fire, would have been given the limelight treatment in election campaign advertisements. Especially for a five-time Vietnam war draft-dodger with “bone spurs”, whose only self-confessed “bravery ” was avoiding contracting sexually transmitted diseases (STDs) without using protection while having sex with prostitutes (“my personal Vietnam”) in the 1990s.

The news has been a well-kept secret. Trump, a narcissist, no stranger to self-aggrandization, has made scant reference to his incredible feat of courage and escape from near-death experience, which his supporters claim was due to the divine shield that protects him at all times. Like, I guess, the divine condom that protected him from contracting STDs in the 1990s.

The Democratic Party nominated to the presidential ticket 59-year-old Vice-President, Kamala Harris, as President, and 60-year-old Governor of Minnesota, Tim Walz, as Vice President, at the conclusion of the Democratic National Convention.

Third Party Candidate, Robert F. Kennedy Jr., son of Robert F. Kennedy and nephew of JFK, suspended his campaign immediately after the Democratic National Convention last week and threw in his lot with Donald J. Trump.

Ever the political whore, RFK Jr had offered his endorsement earlier to Kamala Harris in exchange for a cabinet position in her administration. Which the Kamala camp had wisely rebuffed.

Trump, however, who has always had a penchant for whores of whatever stripe, considers himself fortunate to gain the endorsement of a member of the legendary Kennedy family, even one who has been disowned and held in contempt by the clan. Trump has much in common with RFK Jr, both being convicted felons, RFK Jr for drug trafficking, Trump for much of the gamut of the penal code.

There are two other candidates still in the race. Dr. Cornell West, 71, academic, historian and progressive political activist, who declared his candidacy in June 2023. A man way ahead of America’s medieval times, West is an independent candidate who has run out of campaign finances and is currently running at under 1% in the national polls. A left-wing candidate who supports the benefits enjoyed, one way or another, by the societies of every developed country in the world – wealth-tax on all billionaire holdings and transactions, a national $27 minimum wage, universal health care, affordable housing and free education, mandated family leave and free pre-K childcare, advanced alternative energy programs to eliminate dependence on fossil fuels and aggressive measures to combat climate change – in fact, all those Commie measures despised by even many regular Americans who suffer under the debunked Ann Rand misconceptions that greed is the only motivator of creation of new inventions and wealth. Dr West recently stated the obvious – that “neither party is speaking to the pressing needs of the poor and working people”. In the richest country in the world.

The other active candidate Dr Jill Stein, 74, physician and environmental activist, is running under the aegis of the Green Party. She was a partner of Dr. Cornell West when he was also running under the Green Party, till he decided to run as an Independent.

Both Dr West and Dr Stein have no earthly hope of winning the presidency, but if they do qualify, which is unlikely, they are both capable of swinging vital votes in favor of Donald Trump.

The presidential contest is still a toss-up according to national polls, though the energy which has been surging for the Harris/Walz ticket shows no signs of abating. The Democrats seem to have finally realized that their decade-long adoption of Michelle Obama’s strategy of “When they go low, we go high” has proved to be an abject failure. Especially now that the Trump campaign has veered to a flurry of putrid, personal sexual attacks against Vice-President Harris.

A new and more aggressive strategy, “When they go low, we kick them in their tiny genitals”, the only language Trump and his cohorts understand, is now being considered by the Democrats. They have been hitherto insulting Trump as an authoritarian, wannabe dictator, his supporters a cult of white supremacist neo-Nazis. Those epithets seemed to bother the Trumpers not at all, I suspect because they take these to be compliments, for they describe them exactly for what they are.

So the current strategy is to ridicule them, mock them on their various conspiracy theories and blatant lies, like windmills causing cancer, Lysol curing Covid and Trump’s obsession with his “crowd size” as President Obama did last week. This seems to be working as they are being driven to a manic rage of insecurity resulting in desperation.

Taunt Trump about the blonde weasel on his head, the fake orange spray tan, mock his third-grade vocabulary, his ignorant economic ideas, ridicule the size and mushroom-shaped genitals as described by Stormy Daniels; that he farts himself to sleep during court appearances in New York and remind him of his servitude to Russian President Putin, his ridiculous “love affair” with murderous North Korean dictator, Kim Jung Un, love letters and all. These are provable facts, and they bring out the real, weak, insecure Donald Trump, not the strongman he tries to project himself. The psychopath who will be driven to even more outrageous lies, insults and impossible claims, the only line of defense he knows, which is now becoming increasingly stale.

Trump is already showing steroid-level signs of such desperate lies, He is vacillating on reproductive rights, overturning of Roe v. Wade, which, a few months ago, he was sounding off as one of his greatest achievements. He is guaranteeing tax cuts for all, higher wages, zero inflation, clean air and water, end to all wars, without any plan, just with a wave of his golden wand. He is exposing his ignorance in economic policies when he promises to fight inflation with higher tariffs on imports, as he doesn’t comprehend high tariffs will be paid by US consumers, resulting in higher prices.

His lies are also getting to be increasingly creative and entertaining, with not even a pretense to veracity. The latest whopper is worth reporting.

Trump says that some years ago, he was on a helicopter ride with the then San Francisco Mayor, Willie Brown. The chopper developed engine trouble and they were plunging to their death. The 60-year-old Brown, then one of the most prominent politicians in California, had famously had a romantic affair in the 1990s with then rising political star in California, Kamala Harris. There had been no secret at all in this consensual relationship between two single people – Brown was legally separated at the time, Kamala single and gorgeous.

At this moment of impending doom, according to Trump, Brown turned to him and said, “this might be of no use to you now, but do you remember that lady I was going out with, the prosecutor? Well, before we die, I just want you to know, she’s the worst. She’s a terrible woman. I don’t want to meet my maker without giving you this information. If we survive this crash, I am happy I was able to give this information to you, you may need it someday”!

When a reporter asked Willie Brown, who is now a sprightly 90-year-old, about this story, he said. “No, are you kidding me? I hardly know the man. I have never talked to him about Kamala, who is a dear friend. In any event, do you think I would talk about with a stranger a relationship I had with a lady years ago at the very moment I was facing death?” The obvious inference is that Trump is batshit crazy.

Brown went on, “When I first heard this story, I just assumed he had been on a bumpy helicopter ride with some black person and assumed it was me. I guess to Donald, all us Black guys look alike.”

In an interview with CBS News last week, Brown reiterated that he had never been in a helicopter with Trump and threatened to sue the former president because “somebody has got to make sure he stops lying”. An impossible task. Trump will stop lying only at the moment he stops breathing.

The one and only presidential debate has been scheduled for September 10, but the terms of the debate have not yet been settled upon. It certainly looks as if Trump has realized the dangers of debating an erstwhile Attorney General of California, who has sent hundreds of rapists and fraudsters like him to prison. My guess is that he will make some excuses, about the channel, moderators, equipment, etc., blame Kamala and dodge the debate. He won’t be able to intimidate a seasoned prosecutor like Kamala with his schoolyard bully tactics. And his fear of strong women, especially strong black women, has been widely documented.

Trump will be facing the sentencing for 34 counts of felonies he was found guilty in the New York hush-money case, on September 18.

Washington DC District Judge Chutkan is determined to start the January 6, 2021 insurrection case during September. In addition, Special Counsel Jack Smith filed a superseding indictment against Trump in this case last Tuesday, focusing on Trump’s role as a candidate and not as the president, which Smith hopes “comports with the US Supreme Court’s controversial immunity ruling and will let the case move forward”.

Kamala dispelled the rumors of her reluctance to hold press conferences after the Convention, when she and Walz sat down with CNN anchor Dana Bash on Thursday night for the first formal unscripted interview of their joint campaign.

She made an initial point about moving on from Donald Trump: “I think in the last decade, we have had in the former president someone who has really been pushing an agenda and an environment that is about diminishing the character and strength of who we are as Americans, really dividing our nation. And I think people are ready to turn the page on that”.

Harris said she has changed her position on some issues, such as fracking and single payer health care, but her values haven’t changed. She said she was proud to have played a part of Biden’s achievements especially after the Covid and economic mess they had inherited, adding the “current administration has achieved extraordinary successes”. But she pitched it as a first step, suggesting that “emerging from economic recovery would free her up to do bigger and better things”.

Harris gave the perfect answer when Dana Bash repeated Trump’s infamously racist question: “For years she was Indian, now she has turned black. What is she?” Harris smiled contemptuously and said: “Next question!”

Walz made little impact, and will probably help Kamala get part of the midwestern vote. He will be an adequate Vice-President. He will also be able to take over as President if something, God forbid, should happen to Kamala. After all, the bar set by Trump is pretty low, as all it needs is an IQ above 70 and fewer than a mixed bag of 91 felonies.

I don’t think the interview did much good nor did it do any harm. It didn’t move the needle much – Kamala still enjoys a slim lead in all the polls, including the swing states.

There are more than two whole months till election day. More than enough time to ridicule Trump, whom Kamala has most appropriately described as a “very unserious man”, to utter humiliation and mock him to that section of hell specially reserved for psychopathic losers.

Hopefully, Republican moderates, even some members of his cult, will see that the emperor has absolutely no clothes, that he is all bluster, lies and balderdash. And should be held accountable for his criminal behavior.

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.