Sri Lanka doctors’ association threatens action against private medical universities

ECONOMYNEXT — A doctors’ professional association has written to President Ranil Wickremesinghe demanding that the government revoke plans to approve the establishment of private medical universities in Sri Lanka.

Secretary of the All Ceylon Medical Officers Association Jayantha Bandara told reporters on Wednesday March 20 that the association would take trade union action against the decision if the government did not revoke it.

Bandara spoke to the reporters outside the Presidential Secretariat having just handed over the letter to an official.

“The government is again trying to create a major problem in the country,” he said.

Bandara, a medical doctor, claimed that the issue of private medical universities has led to confrontational situations in the country over the recent past and also led to problems in education and health sectors.

“The government is ready to approve and open several private universities,” he said, asking if it was a priority at the moment.

“This is clearly not something that’s needed now. Without doing what needs to be done, the government is starting private universities that will destory our country’s education and health,” he said.

Bandara did not elaborate on how private medical universities might destroy either education or health.

He said existing state-run medical faculties including recently opened ones are facing a major crisis, with massive shortages of academic staff and resource constraints, which he said has caused a breakdown in education.

“In the health service, doctors and medical staff are leaving the country. A major crisis has been created in the health service. What is the government doing in the meantime? They’re trying to create private universities,” said Bandara.

In their letter to the president, the All Ceylon Medical Officers Association demands that the government provide facilities to existing state-run faculties and take measures to curb the departure of lecturers.

“Also provide solutions to medical and other staff shortages in the health sector,” he said.

“We first ask that the government revoke this decision immediately. Or we’ll take the maximum action we can take as the All Ceylon Medical Officers Association  in due course,” he added. (Colombo/Mar20/2024)