PC polls: A bid to exploit Ditwah impact?

The Opposition has accused the government of seeking to exploit the impact of Cyclone Ditwah to postpone the much-delayed Provincial Council (PC) elections. It has challenged the JVP-led NPP to hold the PC polls immediately. Pivithuru Hela Urumaya leader and former minister Udaya Gammanpila told the media yesterday that the government was all out to avoid an electoral contest on some pretext or another because its vote share had dropped drastically, according to a recent survey.

The government’s approval rating must be decreasing. Otherwise, it would have amended the PC Elections Act promptly and held the PC polls under the Proportional Representation system. However, this does not mean that the Opposition is ready for an election and in a position to turn the tables on the government. Both the government and the Opposition are afraid of facing an election any time soon.

It amounts to a blatant subversion of democracy for a government to meddle with the country’s election calendar. Elections must not be advanced or postponed to suit anyone’s political agenda. Ideally, there should be midterms, which help gauge public perception of the performance of a government. The PC polls are expected to act as a referendum on the incumbent administration’s performance.

It is only wishful thinking that a government can win elections by postponing them. A poll postponement is counterproductive in that it causes public anger to well up and find expression in massive protest votes resulting in electoral anomalies, such as the return of corrupt politicians to power or huge majorities for untested political entities. One may recall that in 1977, the SLFP-led United Front government suffered a crushing defeat after postponing a general election. The UNP won an unprecedented five-sixths majority in Parliament. The SLFP could not make a comeback for 17 long years. The second term of President Jayewardene, who retained the UNP’s steamroller majority by replacing a general election due in 1982 with a heavily rigged referendum, became a disaster. The UNP-led Yahapalana government also postponed the Provincial Council elections in 2017, unable to face them, but lost the 2018 local government (LG) polls and collapsed the following year. President Gotabaya Rajapaksa also blundered by postponing the LG polls in 2022. If he had mustered the courage to hold them, the SLPP would have lost, but the people would have canalised their pent-up anger in the form of a protest vote, and the SLPP government would have been able to make a course correction. President Ranil Wickremesinghe made the same mistake the following year. Neither the SLPP nor the UNP could avoid electoral disasters by postponing the LG polls.

The NPP government finds itself in a dilemma. It has suffered a string of defeats in cooperative society elections, which the main political parties have turned into shows of strength. The LG election results did not meet the NPP’s expectations, which were extremely high. It emerged the winner, but failed to arrest a drop in its vote share and bag a considerable number of hung councils where it secured pluralities. There has been an erosion of its support base, with some powerful state sector trade unions turning against the government. The NPP would not have been in this predicament if it had held the PC polls early last year, when its popularity was high, and the Opposition was in total disarray. Its strategists should be blamed for missing that opportunity.

The government cannot go on postponing the PC polls indefinitely. It has to grasp the nettle. It is lucky that its political rivals are equally wary of facing an election, and have therefore stopped short of cranking up pressure on it to hold the PC elections. Their campaign against the postponement of the PC election is all sizzle and no steak, a wag says.

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.