Benji celebrates 5 major wins at Lectra Stella Awards

CEO and Managing Director Giorgio Montresor receiving the awards for excellence

Benji Ltd., a renowned company in Sri Lanka with Board of Investment (BOI) status, recently emerged as a top performer at the prestigious Lectra Stella Awards held on 18 October, at Shangri-La Colombo.

The company celebrated remarkable success by winning five Cutting Section awards in the across key categories including Best Performance, Highest Efficiency, Best Uptime, Overall Equipment Effectiveness and Best Competency.

Organised by Apparel Technologies, the award ceremony honours industry leaders who have transformed garment manufacturing in Sri Lanka through advanced, automated cutting-room solutions. These recognitions celebrate organisations that redefine efficiency and productivity standards to align with the nation’s commitment to precision and quality in garment manufacturing.

In celebrating these achievements, the Lectra Stella Awards has recognised Benji Ltd. as a company that pushes boundaries and sets new benchmarks in the local industry.

“We are incredibly grateful to receive these awards, which reflect not just individual effort but the collective dedication of our entire cutting team. This recognition underscores our commitment to excellence and innovation in our industry. Each member of our team has played a crucial role in achieving this milestone, demonstrating resilience, creativity, and collaboration,” the company stated.

“Looking ahead, this recognition motivates us to build on our success and continue pushing boundaries. We’re excited to leverage this momentum as we tackle new challenges and strive for even greater accomplishments.”

Commencing its operations in Sri Lanka in 2005 with just 40 operators, Benji Ltd. is a retail, apparel and fashion company that has grown into an organisation now employing over 3,000 people.

The company is a major contributor to its parent company, Oniverse Group headquartered in Verona, Italy.

A significant portion of Benji Ltd.’s products are exported to reach global markets via Oniverse’s extensive network of over 5,000 retail outlets.

Located in Wellarawa Estate, Bingiriya the company’s factory produces a diverse range of apparel products including lingerie, moulded bra cups, laminated foams and other garment accessories.

What sets Benji Ltd. apart from other local manufacturers are the unique qualities that contribute to its ongoing success. The company is equipped with a supportive management team dedicated to empowering employees and encouraging initiative to promote a collaborative culture within its operations. With a strong focus on teamwork, goal alignment and continuous improvement, Benji Ltd. remains driven to bring high levels of creativity and excellence to the Sri Lankan garment industry.

Building on its previous successes, the achievements at the inaugural Lectra Stella Awards represent a new level of accomplishment for Benji Ltd.

The company has previously been honoured with other prestigious recognitions such as the NCE Export Awards and Wayamba Wijayabhimani Awards. According to Benji Ltd., each award, from the CNCI Achiever Award to the Presidential Export Award has marked significant moments in its journey of commitment to industry leadership and excellence.

While honouring its recent recognitions, the company stated that it remains dedicated to setting new standards in the industry by reaffirming its mission to lead with innovation and commitment.