Keells and Uber Eats partner to bring on-demand grocery delivery to Sri Lankan homes

Uber Eats and Keells have partnered to launch on-demand delivery of groceries, household items, fresh produce and more from Keells outlets across Sri Lanka. This partnership brings together the scale, speed and reliability of Uber Eats with Keells’ trusted product range at retail prices, making daily essentials more accessible than ever.

Customers can now order from 30 Keells stores across Colombo, Gampaha, and Kandy, directly on the Uber Eats app. The partnership will expand islandwide to 80+ stores in the coming weeks. From fresh produce to groceries, meats, frozen goods, personal care and cleaning supplies, customers can shop Keells’ wide selection at retail prices – all delivered to their doorstep with speed and reliability.

Varun Wijewardane, Country Manager, Uber Delivery – Sri Lanka, said, “Our partnership with Keells strengthens Uber Eats’ position as the go-to platform for on-demand delivery across grocery, retail and restaurant categories. By combining the strength of Keells’ quality promise, broad range and retail pricing with our reach and technology, we are making everyday shopping faster, easier and more reliable for Sri Lankans.”

Nilush Cooray, Head of Operations – Keells Supermarkets & Senior Vice President, John Keells Group, added, “Keells has always been committed to making quality products more accessible to our customers, whether in-store or online. Having already partnered with Uber Eats to make food delivery part of everyday life in Sri Lanka, this next step in our journey brings the same trust and convenience to groceries and household essentials. Together, we are reshaping how Sri Lankans shop, making it faster, easier, and more rewarding than ever before.”

This partnership reflects a step-change in Sri Lanka’s e-commerce landscape. Together, Keells and Uber Eats are expanding access to quality products while offering a seamless shopping and delivery experience. It is a collaboration that brings together the best of both brands – local trust and operational scale – to meet the evolving expectations of Sri Lankan consumers.

Uber Eats allows people to order from local restaurants and grocery stores at the touch of a button, and have their meals, groceries, and more delivered reliably and quickly. Since launching in Sri Lanka in 2018, Uber Eats has tapped into Uber’s global technology and logistics expertise to serve multiple cities, and enhance the platform experience with additions such as on-demand delivery of groceries and the introduction of Uber One, Uber’s global membership program.

Keells is one of Sri Lanka’s leading modern retail chains, with over 140 stores across the island and a reputation for quality, value, and service excellence. As a subsidiary of the John Keells Group, the brand has consistently set new standards in retail, embracing digital transformation and omnichannel solutions to meet the evolving needs of customers. Recognized the Strongest brand and Most Valuable Supermarket Brand by Brand Finance Sri Lanka in 2025, Keells continues to innovate with a customer-first mindset, delivering trusted fresh and quality products and convenient shopping experiences both in-store and online.

Chocoholics Café announces first international expansion with entry into Saudi Arabia

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.