Aitken Spence PLC & Aitken Spence Hotels shine at the ACCA Sustainability Reporting Awards

Aitken Spence PLC and Aitken Spence Hotel Holdings PLC were adjudged Runner-Up in their respective categories ‘Conglomerates & Diversified’ and ‘Leisure & Connected Services’ at the recently held Association of Chartered Certified Accountants (ACCA) Sustainability Reporting Awards.

Aitken Spence PLC annual report titled ‘A Tripartite Cognition’ highlights a reporting period characterised by the integration of thought, experience, and senses. It illustrates agility, acuity, and responsiveness, attributing these qualities to the insightful reflection and hindsight that enabled foresight in navigating a challenging year with dynamism.

Aitken Spence Hotels annual report titled ‘Multiplicity’ outlined how the company continued to extend augmented value to its stakeholders by crafting and honing a spirit of multiplicity – through their destinations and experiences – thereby enabling the company to advance against all odds during the year under review.

Across the Group, a holistic, systemic approach is implemented to fulfil social, environmental and financial commitments with a long-term perspective that is reflected in the value created by the Group. Signatories to the Ten Principles of the UN Global Compact, and the 7 Women’s Empowerment Principles, the Group also aligns their reporting practices to the Global Reporting Initiative (GRI Standard) and the guidelines of the International Integrated Reporting Council. Operational priorities are aligned to national priorities and identified priorities within the Sustainable Development Goals.

Aitken Spence is the first conglomerate in Sri Lanka to join the Science Based Targets initiative (SBTi), committing to work towards net zero status of emission.

ACCA Sri Lanka has felicitated Sri Lanka’s best sustainability reports for 20 years. The Sustainability Reporting Awards are held with the objective of recognising and rewarding organisations which disclose information on financial, environmental and social performance, and to encourage corporate transparency, accountability and responsiveness to stakeholders.Aitken Spence PLC and Aitken Spence Hotel Holdings PLC teams with their awards at the ACCA sustainability reporting awards.

Expanding Ed-tech through partnerships, collaborations, and AI to improve quality education: Insights for Sri Lanka

ComBank & IFC empowered MSMEs via 27 skills development programmes in 2023

Aitken Spence records strong performance with EBITDA of Rs. 7.8 Bn for 3Q 2023/24

ACCA offers pathways to obtain a Global Finance Qualification and a BSc Degree while awaiting A/L results

ACCA reaffirms ComBank as best among Sri Lankan banks for Sustainable Reporting

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.