Pho Vietnam restaurant launches Banh Mi as Sri Lanka economy recovers

ECONOMYNEXT – Pho Vietnam, Sri Lanka’s pioneer Vietnamese restaurant has launched Banh Mi, a fusion sandwich, which has gained worldwide acclaim, as the South Asian nation recovers from a currency crisis with a specialist chef flown down to train local staff.

The restaurant has gone through tough times over the past five years with the Coronavirus pandemic which was immediately followed by an economic crisis.

“There is a recovery in customers,” says Norah Phung, Founder Director of Pho Vietnam, which was founded in Colombo as the first Vietnamese restaurant in Sri Lanka in 2014.

“There are more tourists and also expats. That is why I decided to launch this now.”

Sri Lanka’s economy has expanded 4.5 percent in the December quarter, after turning positive in the third quarter, ending the slide as the currency stabilized and appreciated amid deflationary monetary policy, giving a stable foundation for businesses to operate and people to live.

Bánh mì or banh mi is a short baguette with thin, crisp crust and a soft, airy texture. It dates back to French rule in Vietnam but the shape and texture has been modified to be very lightweight.

“It is often split lengthwise and filled with meat and savory ingredients like a submarine sandwich and served as a meal, called bánh mì thịt,” Norah says.

“A key challenge is to get the baguette exactly right. The special baguette is made with wheat flour, yeast and water. The secret is in the technique.”

Chef Nguyen Hoang Phu, who came down to Sri Lanka has trained two staff members of Pho Vietnam in baking. Pho is also a famous north Vietnamese soup.

Now 47 years old, Chef Phu has been making Banh Mi from the age 17 when he went to Ho Chi Minh City, the main metropolis in the South of Vietnam, to learn the art.

Later he ran his own bakery, Bep Nha Dieu An, near HCMC. He has also won awards for his work at culinary festivals in Vietnam.

“I want to spread Vietnamese Banh Mi all over Sri Lanka and internationally,” Chef Phu says.

He has helped set up a bakery named “Pho and banh mi” in Nagoya, Japan “Banh mi” in Osaka, Japan, as well as “Banh mi Thuy” in Taiwan.

A typical Banh Mi has slices of Vietnamese ham (chả lụa), coriander leaf (cilantro), cucumber, pickled carrots, pickled daikon and red chili combined with elements from French cuisine such as pâté, and mayonnaise.(Colombo/Mar16/2024)