UNP inaugural rally aimed at targeting SJB: Sujeewa

SJB member Sujeewa Senasinghe says President criticised SJB throughout his speech at recent UNP rally

Claims evident that SJB has emerged as a significant challenge to Wickremesinghe

Notes President’s speech bordered on being hateful, particularly comments directed at G.L. Peiris

Says SJB does not perceive Wickremesinghe as a contender at upcoming Presidential polls

Samagi Jana Balawegaya (SJB) member and former MP Sujeewa Senasinghe yesterday claimed that the primary objective of the rival United National Party’s inaugural rally was to target the SJB.

Addressing a press conference in Colombo, Senasinghe remarked that President Ranil Wickremesinghe, who also serves as the leader of the UNP, directed criticism towards the SJB throughout his speech at the rally. Senasinghe noted that some of the comments made were unusual and not typical of Wickremesinghe’s style.

“It is evident that the SJB has emerged as a significant challenge to President Ranil Wickremesinghe. The SJB is being targeted by everyone, and it is often observed that the group expected to win faces the most attacks,” he remarked.

Senasinghe pointed out that certain remarks in the President’s rally speech bordered on being hateful, particularly comments directed at MP G.L. Peiris. “Normally, the President does not attack G.L. Peiris. However, he went as far as to say that Peiris is carrying out the tasks of a ‘Groom of the Stool’ during his speech,” Senasinghe expressed.

“President Ranil Wickremesinghe understands that the Samagi Jana Sandhanaya will bring significant strength and influence to the SJB. Consequently, he persists in his attempts to thwart the inclusion of the group of MPs, including G.L. Peiris, from joining the SJB. President Ranil Wickremesinghe is exerting considerable efforts towards this goal,” he maintained.

Senasinghe also responded to further remarks made by Wickremesinghe during the rally, particularly regarding the factors behind the UNP’s disappointing performance in the polls.

“The President attributed his failure to speaking the truth. However, in reality, it stemmed from the damage he inflicted on the UNP. The party’s supporters merely responded to Wickremesinghe in the last election,” Senasinghe remarked.

“Despite Wickremesinghe’s announcement of contesting in the upcoming Presidential election, the SJB does not perceive Wickremesinghe as a contender,” Senasinghe emphasised. He added that the SJB intends to hold rallies across the island in the coming months to underscore to the people that it is the SJB which holds the potential to revitalise the country.