Sri Lanka’s SAGT container terminal installs rooftop solar, takes operations electric

ECONOMYNEXT – Sri Lanka’s South Asia Gateway Terminals, a unit of John Keells Holdings, said it had installed rooftop solar to generate part of its power requirements, and is continuing to shift to hybrid and electric gantries and forklifts.

A 460 kiloWatt rooftop solar array was installed on its main offices.

“This investment reflects our deep commitment to reducing our environmental footprint while supporting national and global climate goals,” Chief Executive Romesh David said in a statement.

SAGT said it has made progress in reducing Scope 1 emissions, which are direct greenhouse gas emissions that come from sources owned or controlled by the organization, such as fuel combustion in company vehicles or facilities, through the hybrid conversion of its Rubber Tyred Gantry (RTG) crane fleet.

28 of its 31 cranes have been hybridised, contributing to a 22 percent reduction in carbon intensity per move over the past six years.

The new solar project addresses Scope 2 emissions, or indirect greenhouse gas emissions that result from the purchase of electricity, steam, heat, or cooling by the organization, which accounted for 22 percent of SAGT’s overall carbon footprint in the 2024/25 period.

The rooftop installation is part of a wider strategy to transition to clean energy sources and now supplies approximately 3-5 percent of the company’s annual energy needs, it said.

The company said it is accelerating its sustainability agenda with a series of targeted renewable energy and electrification initiatives.

As part of this, SAGT will introduce two electric forklifts in 2025 and plans to convert 30 prime movers to electric models from its fleet of 80.

The company is also evaluating additional solar installations on its gatehouse rooftops, aiming to create “green gates” that are self-sufficient and powered by solar energy.

This will allow gate operations to be completely independent of the grid, with zero emissions.

“As the industry evolves”, David said, “we are determined to lead by example, transforming terminal operations through clean energy adoption and innovation-driven decarbonisation”. (Colombo/Sep18/2025)