GRI launches its next generation sustainable tires at the Green Impact 2024

GRI, a leading producer of specialty tires for agriculture, material handling and construction machines, unveiled its next generation of environmentally friendly specialty tires with very high sustainable

GRI’s sustainable agriculture tire range, the Green XLR Earth series, now comes with 87.3% sustainable material whilst the Ultimate Green XT the sustainable material handling tire boasts an impressive 93.5% sustainable material.

These next generation tires embody GRI’s vision of moving humanity towards making a positive impact on our planet and dedication to reducing its environmental footprint while delivering high-performance specialty tire solutions. Leveraging innovative technology and advanced natural rubber compounds, GRI continues to lead the way in sustainability across its entire

This significant product launch took place at the Green Impact 2024 in Sri Lanka, an event which brought together industry professionals and key media personnel from across the globe. Spanning across three days, the Green Impact marked a significant milestone in GRI’s sustainability journey, reaffirming its commitment to environmental stewardship and innovation in specialty tire technology.

Bureau Veritas; a global business-to-business service provider in the field of testing, inspection, and certification; validated GRI’s commitment to environmental responsibility by attesting to the carbon footprint reduction of the environmentally friendly, “green” specialty tires. “This certification underscores GRI’s unwavering dedication to sustainability in tires and quality of product,” stated GRI CEO Dr. Mahesha Ranasoma who presented the products to the

GRI Managing Director Prabhash Subasinghe remarked, “The next generation of GRI’s green tires are more than just products; they are symbols of our unwavering dedication to sustainability. With the highest percentage of sustainable materials, these agriculture and material handling tires represent a beacon of hope for a greener tomorrow. From its conception to its production, every aspect has been meticulously crafted to minimise environmental impact without compromising on performance.”

With the introduction of the next generation of environmentally friendly specialty tires, GRI continues to drive sustainable innovation and set new benchmarks in the specialty tire industry.