Sri Lankan Corporate Health & Productivity Awards 2026 launched

The Sri Lankan Corporate Health & Productivity Awards (SLCHPA) 2026 was officially launched recently, introducing an enhanced edition of the platform that recognises organisations committed to strengthening employee wellbeing, workplace health and productivity across Sri Lanka.

The launch marks the beginning of a new chapter for an initiative that continues to encourage businesses to place their people at the centre of organisational success.

Organised by the Chamber of Lankan Entrepreneurs (COYLE), in partnership with the Japan External Trade Organization (JETRO), and powered by Sampath Bank PLC as the Title Partner, SLCHPA 2026 aims to celebrate organizations that recognise the importance of investing in their people as a foundation for sustainable business growth. Through this partnership, JETRO brings Japanese expertise and global perspectives on workplace wellbeing and productivity, further strengthening the Awards’ focus on promoting internationally relevant workplace practices across Sri Lanka.

Since its inception, SLCHPA has evolved into a platform that encourages businesses to look beyond traditional measures of success and recognise the role of a healthy, engaged workforce in driving organisational performance. Over the years, the Awards have highlighted organisations that have introduced impactful workplace initiatives while inspiring companies across sectors to continuously improve their approach towards employee wellbeing, workplace culture and productivity.

Building on this strong foundation, SLCHPA 2026 will be bigger and better, with a renewed focus on recognising more organisations, showcasing innovative workplace initiatives and creating greater value for participating companies. The Awards will provide businesses with an opportunity to benchmark their practices, gain national recognition and demonstrate their commitment towards creating workplaces where employees can thrive.

Commenting on the launch, Suren Chandraratna, Chairman of COYLE said, “SLCHPA was created to recognise organisations that understand the importance of their people and the connection between employee wellbeing and business success. Through this initiative, we aim to encourage morre companies to prioritise healthier workplaces and create a positive impact across Sri Lanka’s business community.”

To ensure that the Awards maintain credibility and recognise genuine workplace excellence, the SLCHPA 2026 evaluation process will follow a structured and transparent approach.

With applications and registrations for SLCHPA 2026 opening soon, organizations of all sizes and sectors are invited to participate in this platform.