My cricketing joke on jogging track won me view of private cricket museum

There is a very picturesque jogging track in Perth’s Applecross Foreshore. It hugs the Swan River, running from Raffles Hotel near Canning Bridge and wending its way for ten kilometres to Point Walter in Bicton. Nature conjures assorted scenic views for the eyes to feast on at all times of the day, as you traverse the track. The sunsets are especially brilliant. The company of graceful swans and cygnets floating elegantly over their own shadows on the water is a sight to behold. And on some occasions, dolphins playfully flipping in the water. The river flows to the Indian Ocean at Fremantle, the Port City and neighbour of Bicton.

At any given time, while daylight prevails, there will be a mix of joggers, walkers and cyclists traversing this track. And their pace determined by their respective ages or that of their canine companions. These four-legged users of the track, by law, have to be on a leash, be they mongrels or pedigreed. And their droppings removed by the owners. A practice in Australia from times immemorial, but brought into Paris only about three years ago to cleanse the city of the “poo” creating havoc for joggers and pedestrians.

It is the norm, as in any country, to nod in polite acknowledgment of the other’s presence when people meet one another going the opposite direction, whilst exercising. I have been fortunate to make many acquaintances since 2006, when I first started using the Applecross Foreshore for my walk or jog. The Shire also offers gratis a well-equipped outdoor gymnasium.

In late autumn 2019, ahead of me was a middle-aged couple striding with their two dogs on leash. Sneaking up behind them, I whispered aloud, “Your dogs remind me of Bradman’s field setting for Lindwall”. The man’s amused response was “Why do you say that?” My response “Four short legs, with the balls swinging both ways!” This was a pun hailing from cricketing lore that I came across at school and retained in my memory as only a cricketing buff would. Clearly, it struck a chord and he said, “My father would have loved the joke.”

We got chatting, with his partner Melanie joining in. Kevin related that his late father had started out as the Dressing Room Attendant of the West Australian Cricket Association grounds, the famous WACA grounds in Perth. He graduated to be the Dressing Room Manager at the time of his retirement in the 1990s and had hobnobbed with many well-known cricketers. Kevin then asked whether I would like to come home with them so that he could show me his cricketing memorabilia. Their well-appointed home was on The Strand, the swanky avenue overlooking the river with panoramic views of the City of Perth across the water. The house had a dedicated room for cricketing memorabilia which included:

= An autographed bat that Bradman had used in a Sheffield Shield game in the 1940s

= Some boundary pegs from the inaugural Test Match at WACA in 1970, England vs Australia, where the debutante Greg Chappell scored a century

= Bats signed by visiting Test teams from Australia, England, West Indies, India and Pakistan

= Replica bat signed by Tony Mann, on his debut Test century against India in 1978 during the breakaway Packer series when the leading players walked out on official Tests. (This series triggered the high earnings of cricketers who were previously on very low wages.)

= A ball used by Graham McKenzie at the inaugural Test match at the WACA

= A pair of gloves signed by Rod Marsh and a ball signed by Dennis Lillie; and

= Numerous other souvenirs including significant newspaper cuttings and Wisden Editions from the 1940s.

During the second quarter of 2020, I read in the newspapers that the property-owning Real Estate Agents, Melanie and Kevin Atree sold their house in Applecross for a mere A$ 11.4 million!

The Rugby World Cup in 1991 was played in the United Kingdom. It is also the game made in heaven according to the purists. I loved the rendition of “Flower of Scotland” prior to the start of a Scotland match. Like many, I also preferred this rendition to that of the national anthem “Scotland the Brave”. The Scottish fans would join in to make any rendition memorable.

Scots have been renowned for their thriftiness and ‘no wonder” as you will see from the following story.

As the Internet nor Google had not come at the time, I wrote to the Scottish Association of Western Australia via snail mail requesting the words of “Flower of Scotland” before the World Cup began. I received a post-paid reply about a week later. Opened the letter in anticipation, and following was the text:

Dear Mr Kodituwakku Please send us a “postage paid, stamped envelope” with your address for us to send you the words of “Flower of Scotland”. Yours sincerely Signed by the Secretary of Scottish Association of WA.

I could only laugh aloud at the absurdity of a Scot carrying out his thriftiness a bit too far, After laughing I threw the letter away, but sent another letter with a stamped envelope enclosed. What a pity I did not have the foresight of Mr Atree (Senior) to hold on to the letter, as it would have fetched a sizeable sum today. I could have sent it to the Scottish Association of WA, to be displayed against their memorabilia.

For those who love that song, Flower of Scotland, here is the refrain, gratis from Google!

Oh Flower Of Scotland, When will we see, your like again That fought and died for Yer wee bit hill and glen And stood against him Proud Edward’s army And sent him homeward Tae think again

The PA in alliance with the JVP wins the 2004 general election

My experience in turning around the Merchant Bank of Sri Lanka (MBSL) – Episode 3

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.