Elvis fan…with blues her forte

It’s, indeed, wonderful to see Sri Lankan artistes doing good abroad…in their adopted homeland.

Andrea Marr, who is based in Melbourne, is very much in the news these days.

She will be performing at the exclusive ‘Women In Blues’ showcase at Alfred’s On Beale Street (rock venue with live entertainment), in Memphis, in the USA, on 9th January 2025, during the International Blues Challenge when bands from all over the world converge on Memphis for the ‘Olympics of the Blues.’

Ten female blues artistes, from all over the world, will be showcasing their original songs in front of the blues industry professionals, managers and labels, and blues fans around the world.

This is Andrea’s fourth performance in the home of the blues.

She has represented Australian Blues three times and, on this occasion, goes as ambassador for Blues Music Victoria, and The Melbourne Blues Appreciation Society’s ‘Women In Blues’ Coordinator.

Andrea was inducted into the Blues Music Victoria Hall of Fame in 2022 and she has just released her 10th album which hit #1 on the Australian Blues Charts.

Born in Dehiwela, in Sri Lanka, she moved to Australia at the age of 14 and Australia has certainly embraced and nurtured her talents and helped her achieve her dreams.

She is known as ‘the pint-sized powerhouse of the blues’ for her high energy, soulful, original music.

Andrea is also a huge fan of the late Elvis Presley and says she has plans to visit Graceland for Presley’s 90th birthday (8th Jan., 2025), adding…”to celebrate this towering talent that was with us for such a short time. It will be my seventh trip to Graceland. It’s why I love all things Memphis.”

She went on to say that she heard Elvis for the first time when she was just seven years old, when it was announced that he had died.

“His voice poured out of a small radio in a little flat, in Sri Lanka, and my dad and mum were really sad he had died. I remember yelling at dad, saying why didn’t you tell me about him? Now he’s dead. I couldn’t stop crying. I think my parents were just shocked. Their little music addict had a new obsession. (I was the child who knew every song on the radio and was on stage from the age of three-and-a-half and hasn’t stopped singing since).

“So dad took me to the record shop and bought me my first Elvis record and played it for me every day. I learned every song. After that, dad usually bought me Elvis records, or cassettes, for my birthday.”

Andrea also has this to say to Elvis Presley fans: “Check out the mind-blowing. Netflix Documentary ‘Return Of The King’. It’s awesome.”

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.