Lankan envoy meets Federation of the  Pakistan Chamber of Commerce and Industry

High Commissioner–designate of Sri Lanka to Pakistan, Rear Admiral Fred Senevirathna, held a meeting with the FPCCI President on 13 August, at the President’s Office of the Federation Chamber of Commerce and Industry in Islamabad.

FPCCI President Atif Ikram Sheikh, along with its members, extended a warm welcome to the High Commissioner-designate of Sri Lanka and congratulated him on his appointment. He noted that the visit symbolises the strong and longstanding friendship between Sri Lanka and Pakistan, rooted in mutual respect, regional cooperation, and historical goodwill.

In his address, the President emphasised the importance of strengthening economic and trade ties between the two nations. He highlighted Sri Lanka’s strategic location and resilient economy as attractive for investment and bilateral ventures, while also pointing out Pakistan’s large consumer market, growing industrial base, and focus on regional connectivity as key factors in expanding its trade presence in South Asia and beyond. He further highlighted that FPCCI is playing a proactive role in bridging Pakistan business, supporting trade facilitation, and contributing to a stronger Pakistan–Sri Lanka economic relations.

The High Commissioner-designate expressed his appreciation to the President for arranging the meeting with warm hospitality and acknowledged the continued collaboration between the two countries. He also highlighted the current political leadership’s vision in Sri Lanka to enforce a zero-tolerance policy against corruption, malpractices, and the misuse of Government property, promote good governance, and create greater investment opportunities for foreign investors.

The High Commissioner-designate further highlighted the facilities and advantages offered to foreign investors, such as the reduction of the standard corporate income tax rate for specific sectors, including small and medium-sized enterprises, exports of goods and services, IT industries, education, tourism, and agriculture. He also noted that Sri Lanka’s strategic location at the centre of key maritime trade routes connecting the Far East, Middle East, Africa, Australia, Europe, and the Americas is one of its greatest strengths. In addition, the country offers a capable workforce, a well-connected and extensive road network, modern infrastructure, and comprehensive support services for business development.

Head of Chancery/Minister of this Mission A. Christy Ruban, representatives from the Ministry of Industry of Pakistan, Presidents and members of the Chambers of Commerce from Islamabad, Haripur, and Rawalpindi, senior members of Pakistan’s gem and jewellery industry, as well as members of the business community representing various organisations attended the meeting, both virtually and in person.