Education Reforms: A Must & Be Embraced By All

Free Education and Free Health should not be a Panacea for Granted

Sri Lanka stands out among countries in Asia and globally for a very unique reason, which we all should be proud of as a nation. It is the “free education” from kindergarten to higher education provided free of charge to all children that stands out Sri Lanka from the rest of Asia, and the world. This indeed is a “special privilege” in the true sense of the word, enjoyed by Sri Lankans from childhood through adolescence. For instance, some of us often tend to forget, and take free education for granted as we grow older. I am never hesitant to call myself a product of free education which only a few countries can afford to offer its citizenry. Sri Lanka being among the few countries to offer free health and free education to all its citizens, people ought to make the best use and appreciative of such life-time benefits for what we are today, without a penny being charged from its citizens. In other words, free education and health offered on a gratis basis, at no cost and no strings attached, could be regarded as a “luxury”, that should be neither taken for granted nor overlooked for petty political or personal reasons. Paradoxically, free education and health come at a cost to our own tax payers, and that is precisely why we, being the beneficiaries of such wholesome deeds of our ancestors, should never lose sight of their sacrifices and magnanimity, and for making our lives that much easier and hassle free, with burden-sharing and taking charge of our education and health.

Allocations for education among the lowest in South Asia and globally

It is often said than done that investment in education, indeed is an investment for the future which goes without saying how much it means for a child to be given the optimum education – he/she richly deserves as a child from childhood until adolescence. Sri Lanka’s annual budgetary provisions for education, unfortunately among the lowest in Asia which stand at mere 3%, on an annualized basis which speaks for the step-motherly treatment given to education by successive governments in power, including the NPP. Despite repeated appeals by the academics and influential quarters within the education spectrum every year, the governments of the day haven’t done enough to make a meaningful and pragmatic contribution to increase financial allocations to education, other than paying a mere lip service from time to time. If the Department of Statistics and Census’ annual reports are anything to go by, the education sector allocations, year on year basis over the last 10 years do not show any positive momentum and significant trajectory. Instead it’s quite the opposite, compared to countries in Asia and elsewhere which is why people are often skeptical about the governments’ sincerity in doing justice to poorly managed systems of education and institutions of learning, managed by the authorities across the country, from schools, universities to places of training that matter the most to children. For a comparison purpose, Sri Lanka’s public education spending is among the lowest in South Asia and globally, consistently stuck between 2.5% and 3% of GDP in recent years. This is almost less than half of the 4.5% average for similar developing economies. While other South Asian nations have increased investment, Sri Lanka’s Verite Research and Public Finance.lk, note that “it ranks at the bottom of the region, struggling with chronic under funding and meagre resource allocations”.

Dr Kannangara –  A Household Name in Sri Lanka :  His Legacy will Remain Eternal

If I were to name my most favorite politician of bygone-era, it is none other than Dr C.W.W. Kannangara, former Minister of Education who has been a house-hold name in Sri Lanka for almost a generation since 1945. It was the late Minister of Education, Dr Kannangara who made education free for all Sri Lankans on 01st October 1945, following his submission of the Free Education Bill to parliament in 1943. These reforms revolutionized Sri Lankan society by providing equal educational opportunities for all, often referred to as the “pearl of great price”, the first of its kind in Asia. If not for his foresight, wisdom and vision, Sri Lanka as a nation wouldn’t have achieved what it had, since independence in 1948, making Sri Lanka and people proud. Suffice it to note, the spirit of free education has been the prime mover of our nation’s strength and, of course, part and parcel of our education system throughout. In fact we are indebted to late Dr Kannangara for taking such a bold, pragmatic and innovative step, and making education free for all. It is with pride, I  recollect delivering a brief anecdotal speech during my childhood in honor and praise of late Dr Kannangara, in which I even made a passing remark and told those in the audience to have his photograph framed and hung in each of their households, though I stopped short of asking them to worship him, for what he had been to all our children. It  is apt to consider declaring “Kannangara Day” throughout our schools, in recognition and appreciation of his pioneering role of championing Free Education for all Sri Lankans.

To my mind, the word education signifies the holistic cultivation of the mind, character, and spirit, rather than mere rote memorization or job training. Rooted in the Latin educare (to nourish) and educere (to lead out), it represents a lifelong process of illuminating the intellect, fostering wisdom, and enabling personal growth.

In fact, educational reform involves planned, systemic changes to school structures, curricula, teacher training, and funding, aiming to enhance learning outcomes, increase equity, and modernize education for all students. Of course, the key focus areas include integrating technology, improving teacher quality, and aligning standards with 21st-century workforce needs, while major reforms often tackle school choice, accountability, and student support.

Be that as it may, I cannot help but thinking, perhaps so do others, why there have been no attempts to bring in pragmatic reforms or forward looking policies to the education sector for quite some time, except for the HNCE and NCGE curriculums introduced in 1970s (with modules on vocational education and training for students from grade 6-9) by the SLFP government of Premier Sirimavo Bandaranaike, and Mahapola Scholarship Scheme of late Higher Education Minister, Lalith Athulathmudali etc. Taking advantage of the NCGE and HNCE curriculum introduced in 1970’s, I was fortunate enough to study vocational training and development modules full time, from grades 6-9, meant to empower and equip students in a wide range of theoretical and practical vocational streams (from mechanical, electronic, automobile, to carpentry, masonry, agriculture), which had been very resourceful in post-school career development prospects of school leavers. However, to the dismay of many, NCGE and HNCE syllabuses were discontinued with the advent of the new government in 1977. Since then, there had been no apparent moves to introduce any reforms to education up until now.

It is usual that educational materials such as curriculums and syllabuses in schools and education institutions become out-dated with the passage of time, needing introduction of reforms at regular intervals. But this is easier said than done as it involves a myriad of spheres and layers, dealing with an entire landscape of multi-stakeholders, spread out in a wide-range of systems and processes. It is indeed a mammoth tedious process requiring a complete overhaul of hitherto prevailing educational materials, systems and procedures, starting from navigation to scrutinizing all standardized systems of operations (SOP) within a given time line / frame, so as to accomplishing the intended education reforms, with precision accuracy, clarity and quality. Adopting reforms on a staggered basis is the norm, and should not be implemented in toto, sans a pilot project of a miniscule scale to begin with, and then implementing the reforms on the projected scale after reviewing and adopting any changes or revisions to the initial reforms as appropriate with the larger picture in focus. Ideally, the sample size and scope of the pilot project may vary depending on the timeline and parameters to be drawn up, including bench-marks and KPIs’, as part of the reform action plan and operational framework. The education reforms to be introduced should not be a mere stop-gap-measure, but must be done after a thorough study and scrutiny, in tune with latest trends and national requirements, based on government policy decisions in terms of short, medium and long terms goals and objectives as clearly set out in the national policy guidelines, with clearly defined parameters and KPI’s, in tandem with the overall national plan of action.

Furthermore, all education reforms should be in commensurate, and in conformity with Sri Lanka’s future trajectory, in keeping with trends and momentum elsewhere in regional and international theatre of operations, so as to catching up with future demand and supply of human resource chains / trajectories in the world, taking into account the rapid transformations and advancements in technology, industrial, value-addition and multifaceted spheres of interest viz-a-viz our local entrepreneurs and businesses companies in the production, export, investment spheres, with a focus on competitors, counterparts, regional players and international stakeholders.

Education Reforms – should be left in the hands of Experts and Specialists

Suffice it to note, advocating education reforms on adhoc basis may not yield the desired effect and impact on the ground, and thereby will not make the system any better, as shown throughout history. So let’s not repeat history, and instead we must be brutally honest and serious with education reforms, which should not be left in the hands of novices, but with people of wisdom, foresight and commitment. After all, it is not just reforms per se, meant to last a month or year, but for the sake of a generation of students. Let’s not commit ourselves to reforms unless we ourselves cannot grasp its gravity with the seriousness it deserves. Ideally any reforms to education should be under the direct purview and supervision of the Education Minister and Secretary, who have proven their worth beyond any doubt. The reform process ideally, should be in the hands of subject experts, familiar with the task at hand, without compromising the integrity, commitment and expertise needed to undertake such a mammoth and cumbersome process with honesty, courage and determination. Being an academic herself, Dr Amarasuriya is well equipped and well placed to handle the task with her far-sighted vision and wisdom, together with her able team of experts in order to bring in much needed innovative, progressive and comprehensive reforms for the next generation of children, inter-alia, for the advancement of Sri Lanka’s human capital and human resources needed to embrace changes and adaptability in line with world trends and advancements.  Alas, lacking sound judgement often can come as a cropper, specially in introducing education reforms, unless it is done meticulously and methodically. As such the introduction of reforms on education, needs fine-tuning and careful consideration of the entire gamut of matters then and there, and review of pros and cons by experts in the field, in a spirit of collective responsibility and cohesiveness.

Grade 6 curriculum episode – “Don’t miss the forest for the trees”

Of course there can be setbacks in handling education reforms, as was witnessed recently in the aftermath of the ongoing education reforms being introduced to school curriculum by the current administration. The unfortunate episode laid bare recently was a case in point, in which the accidental detection of a sexually explicit link / content in the newly introduced students text book of grade 6, opened a Pandora’s Box, raising more questions than answers. The opposition politicians and trade unionists went to town accusing the government of wrong doing, and blaming the Prime Minister for gross negligence in handling such a sensitive matter, despite repeated warnings not to go ahead with the so-called scandalous reform process, citing serious allegations. The members of the Maha Sangha too joined the fray, targeting the education ministry for the alleged lapses, with blame-game on, finger-pointing and accusing none other than the Prime Minister herself for the sordid episode, against which the latter defended her innocence blaming it on a technical or human error. Of course, the sad turn of events  led to a massive uproar in parliament, while both sides of the political divide traded charges and counter charges against each other to the point of demanding the Prime Minister’s resignation in her capacity as the Minister of Education. In fact, a high level committee appointed to look into this saga, had recommended the suspension of key officials in the National Education Council, and had followed suit as per committee’s recommendation. Since then, the matter had subsided for the time being, with a temporary suspension being imposed on text books being circulated among Grade 6 students and schools in toto. But, to make matters worse, the exposure of the questionable website in the students’ text book had led to jeopardizing the entire process to a stalemate. As the famous adage goes “don’t miss the forest for the trees”, “don’t miss the forest for the trees” is often said that one should not lose sight of the bigger picture for trivial details.

Education, inherently is not a zero sum game, and guess what, I have my two-cents-worth to drive my point home. In essence, education reforms stood something closer to my heart back in the day, being a student-turned-Science & Maths teacher in 1981, soon after my AL exam. Since then, I have become fairly conversant with the formal teaching atmosphere of a class-room setting at a school in my home-town of Matara. In my brief stint of teaching science and maths to OL students, I could very well adapt myself to the vagaries of the highly tense situation prevailing in a typical class room of over 30 students, and what I was expected as a young teacher. In fact the school was located in close proximity to our home so that I could bike back and forth to school within such a short period of time. Indeed, I was lucky to be assigned grade 10 students, and had the fortune of gaining first hand – hands on experience. It was a life-time and mutually rewarding experience which will linger in my memory forever. I was doubly lucky to be close to my mother, and she herself was a teacher in a nearby school at the time, who blessed and stood by me always. My mother was such a mentor and inspiration to me, yet it was heart breaking when I had to bid farewell and leave her alone at home as I stepped into my 4-year university life.

I am indeed proud and happy to have started my career as a teacher, in what could be considered as the most noble profession in Sri Lanka, perhaps in the context of the overarching mindset of our generations of educationists and academia. Of course, after my brief stint as a teacher, I moved up the ladder with time, to become an Agronomist, Researcher, Banking Executive, Civil Servant, Administrator, and last but not the least, a Diplomat in the latter part of my career. When looking back, I have no regrets over my career accomplishments and progression. Above all, I pretty much think that my teaching experience to be the best and most rewarding, though it only lasted barely a year before stepping into the university for my higher education. Indeed teaching has been a mutually rewarding profession, that I truly valued and cherished with students and teachers alike, doing what I am fond of, rendering my two-cents’worth to students in our village, not far from where our ancestral home was. Upon my retirement after 31 years of public service, I have assumed yet another teaching assignment  (Robotics), and am pleased to have been back in my good old  teaching profession, and to be able to catch up from  where I left off 45 years ago. After-all, it’s my giving back  time to the motherland, having benefitted enormously from free education for almost 12 years, firstly as a school student for 12 years, and then as an undergraduate for 4 years, which I enjoyed to the fullest as the most rewarding years of my life. To sum it up, I have completed a total of 31 years of service, holding 8 multi-disciplinary jobs, before joining the Sri Lanka Diplomatic Service and finally, back to teaching once more, which is my favorite. But, I can’t wait to return home, Sri Lanka, where I belong.

The Pride of Sri Lanka – A song dedicated to all Sri Lankans

Sri Lankans are a privileged lot, and should not lose sight of what we have collectively inherited from our forefathers. It reminds me of a song, one of my life-time favorites, dedicated to all Sri Lankans  –  “Sasara wasana thuru Niwan dakina thuru pinketha hela ran derane yali upadinnata hethu wasana wewa hethu wasana” – By W.D. Amaradewa

This song is conceptualized, based on Sri Lanka’s proud history, beauty, serenity, tranquility and prosperity. Sri Lanka, once called the “Granary of Asia” (being self-sufficient in staple food), “Serendipity” (being a world-renowned trade route – Silk Route), “Paradise in the Indian ocean” (being an exotic year-round destination), a “Thrice-blessed-island” (being inhabited by spiritually enriched people), and last but not the least, a “Dream” destination (being the most friendly Asian destination, offering most exquisite cuisine anywhere in the world. This song reminds us of the context in which it was first sung and why it remains an all-time-favorite-hit for a generation of Sri Lankans, and one of my-life-time favorites too. In essence, the song itself is a reason for us to be proud of ourselves as Sri Lankans, amidst our island nation being an inspiration, reason and purpose to live our dream of ultimate destiny of becoming liberated and rid ourselves from the from cycle of rebirth and death once and for all, which is the one and only life-long wish and dream of every devout Buddhist in the world.

*The writer is a retired Ambassador and Foreign Ministry Spokesman. He can be reached at schandrad@hotmail.com