CEAT ranks as Sri Lanka’s Most Valuable Tyre Brand in 2025 Brand Finance Report

Elevated to 6th strongest consumer brand in the country; brand value up 15% year-on-year

CEAT, Sri Lanka’s highest-selling pneumatic tyre brand, has once again reaffirmed its leadership in the country’s automotive sector by being ranked the ‘Most Valuable Tyre Brand in Sri Lanka’ for 2025 in the latest edition of the Brand Finance Lanka rankings.

According to the report by Brand Finance – the world’s leading brand valuation consultancy – CEAT has grown its brand value by 15% to Rs 2.325 billion, securing 44th place overall among Sri Lanka’s 100 most valuable brands.

Notably, CEAT has also been recognised as the 6th strongest consumer brand in the country based on its Brand Strength Index (BSI) score of 83.3/100, and retains its AAA- brand strength rating, a distinction shared by only a handful of top-tier brands in the island.

Globally, CEAT is ranked the eighth strongest tyre brand by Brand Finance.

Commenting on the brand’s performance in Sri Lanka, CEAT Kelani Holdings Managing Director Ravi Dadlani said: “To remain Sri Lanka’s most valuable tyre brand, and to be among the country’s top ten strongest consumer brands, is a tribute to the quality of our products, the clarity of our strategy and the consistency of our execution. It reflects the strength of CEAT’s consumer trust, operational discipline and financial commitment, and our relentless focus on quality and innovation.”

CEAT’s outstanding performance in the 2025 rankings comes amid intensifying competition in the local tyre market. Yet, the brand has maintained 100% brand awareness levels among the survey sample, a testament to its ubiquitous presence, widespread recall, and deep consumer trust.

With more than 1.2 million tyres sold annually, CEAT continues to dominate the domestic market across multiple categories, while maintaining its global footprint in over 110 countries, including key markets in Europe and the United States. CEAT is also the most awarded tyre brand in Sri Lanka.

Central to CEAT’s brand momentum in 2025 is its 360-degree strategic marketing campaign designed to “premiumise” its car radial range. The campaign, which repositions CEAT’s 15-inch and above car radials as German Engineered tyres, emphasises controlled and comfortable driving – a proposition supported by omnichannel activation across television, digital, cinema, press, outdoor media, and retail visibility.

In parallel, CEAT has announced significant investments in advanced manufacturing technologies and product development, with a focus on expanding its car and SUV radial portfolio. This includes the launch of the new CEAT Europe Range, designed for high-performance European vehicles, and the continuous enhancement of performance across its entire passenger vehicle line-up.

To reinforce brand premiumisation, CEAT has also rolled out a nationwide network of premium retail outlets, elevating both the customer experience and service quality standards.

Founded in 1996, Brand Finance is the world’s leading independent brand valuation consultancy. It produces the annual Brand Finance Global 5000 brand valuation database and operates in over 25 countries, including Sri Lanka. The 2025 rankings were based on a customer research sample from Colombo and Gampaha, using ISO 10668-compliant valuation methodologies.

HSBC awarded Best International Bank in Sri Lanka by Euromoney for the second consecutive year

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.