Qatar Sri Lanka Business Council launched in Doha by Marshad Barry

Ambassador of Sri Lanka to Qatar Mohamed Mafaz Mohideen (centre) with office bearers of Qatar Sri Lanka Business Council at the event

Ambassador of Sri Lanka to Qatar Mohamed Mafaz Mohideen (right) and President of Qatar Sri Lanka Business Council John Prasad exchanging documents during launch of Council at Sri Lanka Embassy in Doha

Ambassador of Sri Lanka to Qatar Mohamed Mafaz Mohideen (right) and Inthicab Rawoof launching Qatar Sri Lanka Business Council website

Diplomatic relations between the State of Qatar and the Republic of Sri Lanka began officially at the Ambassadorial level (Non-Resident) on 20/07/1976.

Sri Lanka opened its Mission in Doha in 1997 and Qatar opened its Mission in Colombo on 28/09/2004. Since then, the bilateral relations between the two countries witnessed great progress and development in various fields. Launching of Qatar Sri Lanka Business council is an excellent initiative and remarkable milestone to foster closer relationship between business communities in Qatar and Sri Lanka as well as to promote and develop mutual investments and bilateral trade opportunities of both countries and also to facilitate enhancing economic ties between Qatar and Sri Lanka.

The event held to inaugurate the Qatar Sri Lanka Business Council emphasised the aim and plans of the organisation in the presence of Ambassador of Sri Lanka to Qatar Mohamed Mafaz Mohideen, office bearers of the council and Embassy officials. Addressing the gathering Sri Lankan Ambassador to Qatar Mohideen mentioned: “The establishment of this Business Council is not merely symbolic but holds immense practical value. It serves as a dedicated platform to strengthen economic ties, facilitate business interactions, and explore new avenues for growth and cooperation between our two nations,” also he added: “Qatar and Sri Lanka share a rich history of trade and cultural exchange, and now, through this Council, we have the opportunity to elevate our commercial relationship to new heights. The council will undoubtedly create a conducive environment for enhancing trade volumes, attracting foreign direct investment (FDI), and exploring emerging sectors of mutual interest by fostering direct engagement between businesses, promoting investments, and facilitating knowledge exchange.”

Qatar Sri Lanka Business Council President John Prasad stated that main objectives of the council is to promote bilateral trade, share investment opportunities, foster business collaboration, enhance networking and support SMEs .Also he mentioned that the Council will work to create a balanced trade relationship by enhancing and diversifying trade between Qatar and Sri Lanka; encourage Qatari investments in key sectors in Sri Lanka such as tourism, real estate, manufacturing, products and services; share business opportunities with the Sri Lankan business community to collaborate and explore the Qatari market through building a strong business network and relationship between the business communities of Qatar and Sri Lanka while  providing the necessary information and groundwork for small and medium-sized enterprises to expand into international markets. Further he mentioned that: “The success of this business council depends on the active collaboration and participation of the business communities from both nations. By working together, we can create a dynamic and successful network that will mutually benefit our countries.”

Qatar Sri Lanka Business Council is affiliated with the Sri Lankan Embassy in Doha and all office bearers are Sri Lankan professionals currently working in Qatar’s different sectors. At this important occasion the Council launched a website detailing its objectives as well as different trade and investment opportunities in Sri Lanka. The Council’s debut office bearers include Vice-president A. Yoonus, Secretary Waruna Gunasekara, Treasurer Adil Nastar and Shreen Abeysekera, Intiqab Rawoof, Tara Dias, Neomal de Silva, Chanka Dissanayake and Saad Imthiyaz as members present at the launch.