CSE completes 2nd planting phase of 4000 trees in Rajawaka forest

CSE team undertakes ‘Lets Celebrate 40 Years With 4,000 Trees’ CSR initiative with Rainforest Protectors of Sri Lanka

The Colombo Stock Exchange (CSE) successfully concluded the second stage of its landmark reforestation initiative in collaboration with the non-profit Rainforest Protectors of Sri Lanka, with the members of the CSE planting the first 200 saplings of the second stage in the Rajawaka rainforest last week.

The conclusion of the second stage of the initiative will see the complete planting of 4000 tree saplings planted in the Rajawaka rainforest, which began last November to commemorate the CSE’s 40th anniversary.

The CSR collaborative initiative, themed ‘Lets Celebrate 40 years with 4,000 Trees’, is part of ongoing reforestation efforts under the ‘Wanaropa’ programme, aligned with the Bonn Challenge, which targets the restoration of 200,000 hectares of degraded forest land in Sri Lanka.

The Rajawaka rainforest, situated on the border of the wet and intermediate zones, is host to diverse landscapes and a rich biodiverse biome, including elephants, leopards, bee colonies and other unique fauna. The initiative aims to expand forest cover and restore the ecosystem, thereby combatting climate change, protecting biodiversity, preventing habitat loss, enhancing water security for nearby communities, enhancing carbon absorption and improving soul fertility. The programme will also undertake community level engagement, providing essential education on conservation and prevention of human-led forest fires and habitat loss.

The CSE is also a member of the global Sustainable Development Stock Exchange initiative and works closely with GRI South Asia to promote sustainability reporting amongst listed companies. The top 100 listed companies based on market capitalisation as of January 1, 2025 observed requirements to adopt the SLFRS S1 and S2 sustainability disclosure standards, with effect from the financial year 2025.  The CSE has also introduced a Guide on Communicating Sustainability for listed entities, established a listing framework for sustainable bonds, expanded sustainable finance products regulatory framework through green, social, sustainability and sustainability-linked (GSS+) bonds. Between 2024 and 2026 companies listed eleven such debentures, ranging from green bonds, blue bonds, social bonds, sustainable bonds and GSS+ bonds raising over Rs.82 billion.