Be careful what you wish for

Nicaragua’s long-serving President Daniel Ortega, 80, is always in the news for the wrong reasons. He has captured the headlines again by declaring that Nicaragua will not have elections hereafter as he wants to “build a wall” against the Opposition. A former Marxist guerrilla, he made this announcement during a recent ceremony to mark the 47th anniversary of the Sandinista revolution, which overthrew Anastasio Somoza’s dictatorship.

It is said that Russia got rid of the Tsar but had too many Commissars to contend with thereafter. The Nicaraguan people, who ousted the U.S.-backed right-wing dictator Somoza, hoping for liberation from the clutches of that dictator, have been languishing under the family dictatorship of Ortega and his wife, Murillo, who is the Co-President; they now face the threat of being deprived of their franchise.

Politicians may espouse different ideologies, but they behave similarly after savouring power, which drives them to act out of expediency rather than principle and do everything possible to perpetuate their hold on it. In Sri Lanka, a left-leaning government went to the extent of misusing its two-thirds majority to extend its parliamentary term by two years from 1975 to 1977. In doing so, the SLFP-led United Front cooked its own goose. The UNP, which came to power in 1977, made a general election disappear in 1982, and President J. R. Jayewardene, a full-blooded capitalist, even considered ‘rolling back electoral democracy’. Democracy has suffered at the hands of other Presidents as well.

The NPP government led by the JVP, a former ‘Marxist’ guerrilla outfit, too, has chosen to postpone elections as it is wary of facing an electoral contest any time soon. Some political commentators are of the view that the PC polls may not be held next year as well. More worryingly, some JVP leaders often quote the Chinese Communist Party leaders as having said that a government should be in power for about 15 to 20 years to develop a country. Their rhetoric and action lend credence to the Opposition’s claim that they are working towards establishing a one-party rule. They unleashed mindless terror in a bid to scuttle elections and capture power through extra-parliamentary means in the late 1980s and tried to storm the parliament complex in 2022.

In an interview with The Guardian, Tiziano Breda, Latin America senior analyst at the NGO, Armed Conflict Location and Event Data, has explained why the Ortega and Murillo regime is wary of facing elections: “Ortega and Murillo are evidently afraid of the idea that the slightest political opening could create the conditions for dissent to manifest and threaten their grip on power, possibly suggesting that their already feeble domestic support is further falling.” This is the predicament of a former Marxist rebel and his associates in Nicaragua.

Participation in democratic elections as well as gaining representation in political institutions is no guarantee of one’s commitment to democracy. Ortega returned to power in 2006 by winning a presidential election, 16 years after losing parliamentary polls. He has since retained power through successive elections that critics say have become increasingly undemocratic. Adolf Hitler employed a similar method. He exploited public anger over the Great Depression, unemployment and the Treaty of Versailles, enabling the Nazi Party to expand its support through relentless propaganda, mass rallies and appeals to German nationalism and capture power democratically. In the July 1932 parliamentary election, the Nazis emerged as the largest party in the Reichstag, although they never secured an outright majority. Hitler then passed the Enabling Act on March 23, 1933 by intimidating legislators and excluding many opposition deputies, allowing his government to enact legislation without parliamentary approval, effectively dismantling Germany’s constitutional democracy. All other political parties in Germany were banned and independent trade unions dissolved; the press was censored and political dissent ruthlessly crushed. The Nazis thus transformed Germany into a one-party dictatorship.

Eternal vigilance is said to be the price of liberty. Sri Lankan voters do not act rationally when they elect their representatives. They go to the polls in search of political messiahs and wish for governments with mammoth majorities to improve their lot. Be careful what you wish for.

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.