The Right of Passage of Ships in the Straits of Hormuz

The long drawn out imbroglio in the straits of Hormuz and the blockades to navigation of ships through these straits by the warring parties to the US and Israel war against Iran was causing immeasurable economic disruption and suffering to people in the region and around the world. The signing of the Memorandum of Understanding and the ceasefire was received with cautious optimism and it is to be hoped that the fragile ceasefire endures. The seas are the paths of navigation and to the flow of goods and trade around the world. This is why freedom of navigation in the seas has always been the most important principle of the international law relating to the seas. Hence the right of innocent passage of ships even in territorial waters of coastal states and in international straits, has been retained despite claims of territorial sovereignty by coastal states.

The ongoing negotiations and the possibilities of a final settlement and permanent opening of the straits of Hormuz requires us to look at the international law of the sea and the question of passage of ships through territorial waters and international straits as also the rights of the different parties I.e the right of the coastal state or states, and the rights of third states in these waters which is what this article seeks to set out.

The law of the Seas has not been static. It has been dynamic and evolving in response to economic and political factors and new dimensions in science and technology. In Roman law the sea was regarded as ‘Res communes’ open to all. Subsequently there was the, closed sea doctrine and around the 16th century doctrine of the open seas ‘Mare Liberum’ espoused by the Dutch Jurist Grotius, which served the interests of the maritime and colonial powers like Holland and England. However in the 20th Century with new states in Asia, South America and Africa coming into being, there was a curtailment of this freedom as these states wished to control the resources of the seas adjoining their coasts, and hence the coastal states began to have greater areas of the sea under their sovereignty, as in the territorial sea, the exclusive economic zones, and under the sea, in the continental shelf of the seabed. These new zones were recognised under the 1982 Law of the Sea Convention. However, in order to protect the right of navigation in the seas the customary international law right of innocent passage of ships in the High seas was extended into the Territorial waters and Exclusive economic zones of coastal states and to international straits. This right has been codified and incorporated into the United Nations Law of the Sea treaty 1982, (UNCLOS), to which a large number of states are party.

– It must be pointed out that in the territorial sea i.e. the seas adjoining the territory of States with maritime boundaries, it has always been recognised that the State exercises a sovereign right which extends not only over the Sea but also over the Air space. In the Sea up to a certain limit, which was earlier recognised as extending to 3 miles which was then the canon shot limit of coastal defenses. Today under UNCLOS it extends to 12 miles of territorial sea. Under the traditional law of the sea as set out by ‘Colombos’ a classical authority on “the International law of the Sea”, the Coastal State exercised well defined rights of control over foreign ships of war and merchant vessels in respect of police, customs and revenue functions, which implies right to collect tolls, fishing rights, maritime ceremonial and right to establish defense zones. In so far as the State exercises all these powers there is little to distinguish between territorial waters and internal waters. But there is one important point of difference and that is the Right of innocent passage, which is also provided for in United Nations Convention on the Law off the Sea (UNCLOS). As it is also a customary right of international law, it binds even non-parties to the Law of the Sea Convention such as the United States of America.

Innocent passage is defined under the convention as navigation through the territorial sea for the purpose of traversing the sea without entering internal waters or of making for internal waters, or for making for the high seas from internal waters i.e. Ports. The earlier 1958 Convention, defines it as “one that is not prejudicial to the peace, good order or security of the coastal state.” The 1982 Convention sets out what activities would be prejudicial and this includes any threat of force against the sovereignty, territorial integrity or political independence of any State or in any other manner in violations of the principles of international law in the Charter of the United Nations”. A new feature is the addition of any acts of willful and serious pollution contrary to the Convention. The Coastal State is also empowered to make laws and regulations relating to innocent passage as well as designated traffic separation schemes. Foreign ships exercising this right must comply with the laws and regulations of the coastal state. The question of the right of innocent passage of war ships is not specifically provided for in the Convention, however state practice indicates that they may require prior authorisation as in the case of India, Sri Lanka and other states such as Soviet Union, France, Norway etc.

The Coastal State may take the necessary steps to prevent passage which is not innocent. Furthermore it is the Coastal State that has the right to characterise the Passage. If the Coastal State deems the passage to be ‘Not Innocent’ it may refuse such passage. Hence although foreign ships have such right the Coastal State exercises a considerable degree of Control. As regards the Strait of Hormuz this falls within the territorial waters of Iran and Oman, and these states exercise this jurisdiction. Under UNCLOS all Coastal states have a territorial sea of up to 12 nautical miles and a contiguous zone of 12 nautical miles. In the case of States with opposite or adjacent coasts as in the case of Iran and Oman, the territorial waters are divided between them by agreement or by a median or lateral line.

The Strait of Hormuz is regarded as an international strait. International straits are narrow natural waterways connecting two parts of the high seas or Exclusive Economic zones with a High sea. UNCLOS provides for transit passage for ships in such Straits. Transit passage unlike innocent passage allows for continuous and expeditious transit for ships, submarines and Aircraft. However the Straits of Hormuz does not connect two parts of the High seas as for example the Straits of Malacca connects the Indian Ocean to the Pacific Ocean, or the Straits of Gibraltar connects the Atlantic Ocean to Mediterranean Sea. The Straits of Hormuz actually connects two parts of the same water body i.e. the ‘Persian Gulf’, and the Gulf of Oman which is not a separate ocean or sea. The Persian Gulf and Gulf of Oman are both parts of what is in the nature of an inland sea as for example the Baltic Sea. However as it has been regarded as an international straits over a long period of time it may not be possible to change its designation.

In any event even if there is some doubt as to whether these are international straits and hence there is no transit passage in these straits, there is nevertheless the right of innocent Passage. In the case of transit passage, it ensures freedom of Navigation and over flight solely for continuous and expeditious transit. The ships or Aircraft must proceed without delay, refrain from threat of force and comply with safety and environmental regulations. So we can see that freedom of navigation is assured and while Iran as the coastal state can claim that their action to close the strait was an act to protect their sovereignty, the blockade by the United States was illegal as it is contrary to the Treaty and customary international law of the Sea.

Way forward – Under the Charter of the United Nations it is the Security Council which has the primary responsibility for maintaining the peace and security of the world. Unfortunately this has not been the case in respect of the war in the region and threats to freedom of Navigation. Furthermore States whose interests were affected who should have made a collective effort to resolve the issue amicably keeping in mind the Sovereignty and territorial integrity of the States through whose territorial waters the straits are situated, namely Iran and Oman failed to intervene. It must also be kept in mind that the Coastal State in this instance Iran, has presented its action of Closure of these Straits as a defensive measure against an unprovoked armed attack and use of force by third states namely US and Israel. An attack which was not carried out under the mandate of the United Nations Security Council which alone has the right to initiate collective military action to restore international peace.

A fragile ceasefire under constant pressure remains in doubt and the recent signing of a Memorandum of Understanding between Iran and USA through the mediation of Pakistan, Oman and Qatar is still in place while negotiations continue. Once Peace is restored with guarantees for non-renewal of attacks, Iran can be called upon to fully open the straits, which were open before the commencement of the attacks. The Freedom of Navigation which is the underlying principle of the law of the Sea can then be restored and the right of passage in the straits of Hormuz restored.

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.