Celebration of 78th anniversary of Independence of Sri Lanka in Brasilia

Chief Guest, Foreign Affairs Ministry of Brazil Secretary for Asia and the Pacific Ambassador Susan Kleebank

Foreign Affairs Ministry of Federative Republic of Brazil Secretary for Asia and the Pacific Ambassador Susan Kleebank was the Chief Guest at the historic occasion of celebration of the 78th anniversary of the Independence of Sri Lanka in Brasilia held at the Hotel Villa Rizza in Brasilia. On 6 February 2026, organised by the Embassy of Sri Lanka. Ambassadors, members of the diplomatic Corp, members of the Senate, representatives of international organisations, senior officials of the Foreign Ministry, other Ministries, departments, agencies of the Government, business entities, journalists in Brazil joined the celebration at the invitation of Sri Lanka Ambassador to Brazil C.A. Chaminda I. Colonne and Spouse Stephan Senanayake.

By lighting the traditional oil lamp, the Secretary for Asia and the Pacific Ambassador Susan Kleebank, Sri Lanka Ambassador to Sri Lanka Chaminda Colonne, Extraordinary State Secretariat for International Relations of the Government of Federal District Secretary Paco Britto, Department of India, South and Southeast Asia Director Ambassador Everton Lucero, Ambassador (designate) of Brazil to Sri Lanka Jorge Kadri, inaugurated the historic occasion of celebration of the 78th anniversary of the Independence of Sri Lanka in Brasilia.

By singing the National Anthem of the Federative Republic of Brazil, followed by the National Anthem of Sri Lanka, commenced the event. Two minutes of silence was observed, to honour our fallen heroes all Sri Lankans who sacrificed their lives for the independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of our motherland, thereafter.

Foreign Affairs Ministry Secretary for Asia and the Pacific Ambassador Susan Kleebank said,

“Beyond our political and economic ties, Brazil and Sri Lanka are also connected by history and language. The Portuguese presence in Sri Lanka from the 16th century had a linguistic influence in Sinhala, which remains until present date. Words such as mesa (table), janela (window), sapattu (from sapato, shoes), almariya (from armário, cupboard) and kamisaya (from camisa, shirt) illustrate the similarities between our languages. Our common history contributes to bringing our peoples closer.

Brazil and Sri Lanka have enjoyed friendly relations since 1960. Over the past 66 years, our countries have built a relationship based in mutual trust, dialogue, and cooperation. Throughout this period, our bilateral ties have grown stronger.

In 2025, our trade increased by 50% compared to 2024. While this is encouraging, there remains a great potential for further growth. With the shared commitment and support of both governments, we are working to turn this potential into concrete results. Our common objective remains to expanding and deepening our bilateral relationship. Cooperation between Brazil and Sri Lanka has an extraordinary potential, in areas such as agriculture and livestock, biofuels, energy and defence.

The Brazilian Cooperation Agency, for example, is currently developing with Sri Lankan counterparts’ projects aimed at improving sugarcane yields and dairy cattle production. We expect these projects to be signed soon, allowing for its implementation phase.

Brazil had also recently stood alongside Sri Lanka by providing humanitarian assistance, following the extreme climate events that affected the country late in 2025. With your permission, I would like to take this opportunity to reiterate Brazil’s solidarity with the families who lost their loved ones as a result of Cyclone Ditwah.

We believe that 2026 will be particularly fruitful for bilateral relations, maintaining an upward trend that we have been witnessing in recent years. It is our intention to hold Political Consultations, which will provide an opportunity to review our bilateral agenda and to set priorities for the future. For Brazil, South Asia and Southeast Asia have gained momentum as priorities for Brazilian foreign policy. Paths are being created to further strengthen our relations, and we must seize every opportunity to deliver results that are mutually beneficial to our societies.

I must say that this progress does not happen by chance. It is the result of a quiet but effective work of diplomats and government officials who pave the way for closer interaction between our countries. In this regard, I would like to commend the efforts of Ambassador Chaminda Colonne, who, since her arrival in Brasilia last October, has worked tirelessly toward this goal.

On this auspicious occasion marking Sri Lanka Independence, let´s celebrate the ever-growing friendship between our countries. I am confident that our ties will continue to flourish in the years ahead.”

Ambassador Chaminda Colonne said: “After Sri Lanka’s independence in 1948, and establishment of formal diplomatic relations in 1960, relations between Sri Lanka and Brazil continued to grow on a strong foundation of mutual respect and understanding. The Brazil-Sri Lanka friendship group, exchange of high-level visits, bilateral agreements/Memoranda of Understanding, bilateral political consultations have further consolidated our long-standing friendly relations. As the total bilateral trade turnover was $ 169 million, in 2025, and there are no significant investment flows between our two countries, it is timely that us to focus on identifying new trade, economic avenues for cooperation and investment. Sri Lanka is keen to attract more tourists from Brazil and the Latin American region.

Government of Sri Lanka strongly considers South-South Cooperation, development cooperation between the Global South, as a key driver of sustainable development among our likeminded nations. Therefore, a Sri Lankan resident mission in the Latin American region was established in Brazil, first in Rio de Janeiro and later in Brasilia, and today, it is concurrently accredited to nine other Latin American countries, namely Argentina, Bolivia, Chile, Colombia, Guyana, Paraguay, Peru, Suriname and Uruguay.

Cyclone Ditwah struck Sri Lanka at the end of November 2025, as it began the process of recovering from the cumulative shocks of the pandemic and the economic crisis, compounding vulnerability. I thank the Government of Brazil for the donation of 10 water purifiers to the Victims of the Ditwah Cyclone.”

During Ambassador’s speech, she showcased distinguish gathering a video presentation on Sri Lanka’s ongoing recovery efforts, aftermath of Cyclone Ditwah’s struck and launching ceremony of the ‘Rebuilding Sri Lanka’ by President Anura Kumara Dissanayake of Sri Lanka with the QR code. The Independence Day message of President Anura Kumara Dissanayake was also read by the Ambassador.

Both exchanged toasts and the event was concluded with the dinner reception hosted by Ambassador Chaminda Colonne and Spouse Stephan Senanayake. Nearly 200 distinguished guests, including more than 65 Ambassadors were presented with Basilure tea in gift bags with Rebuilding Sri Lanka’s QR code.

The event was sponsored by Basilure Tea of Sri Lanka, Sri Lanka’s Honorary Consul in Rio de Janeiro Dr. Sohaku Bastos, Paulo Bruno, Professor Jose Augusto, Brazil Audi Diplomatic Sales and Banco Rendimento in Brazil, at the request of Ambassador Chaminda Colonne.

In the morning of 4 February 2026, Ambassador Chaminda Colonne hoisted the national flag at the Embassy Premises and Independence messages from the President Anura Kumara Dissanayake, Prime Minister Dr. Harini Amarasuriya and Foreign Affairs, Foreign Employment and Tourism Minister Vijitha Herath of Sri Lanka were read.