Sri Lanka sets up food security committee amid $220 rice tax, import licensing

ECONOMYNEXT  – Sri Lanka has set up a committee to ensure food security and nutritional safety a government statement said, while food freedoms are constrained by high import taxes and licensing to give profits to producers and keep food prices artificially high.

“The prime objective of the government is to establish national food and nutrition safety and to provide the food securely and to provide minimum food requirements to every person in quality and quantity at an affordable price,” the statement issued after this week’s cabinet meeting said.

Sri Lanka taxes most foods at unusually high levels to give profits to farmers, collectors and millers, undermining the food freedoms of the poor in particular.

Sri Lanka taxes rice at 65000 rupee tax per tonne or around 222 US dollars a tone at current exchange rate.

As a result rice in Sri Lanka retails around 750 dollar a tone compared to export prices of arounds 450 to 470 dollars (about 140 rupees)  for similar grades of rice or about 50 percent higher than the rest of the world.

Sri Lanka rice prices have increased in recent months, even as global prices dropped and there are shortfalls amid price controls.

Sri Lanka also taxes maize imports, a key ingredient for poultry and dairy productions, keeping protein prices artificially high hurting children of poor families in particular, critics have said.

A series of other cereals and also potatoes are taxed to give profits to farmers in tax regime promoted by past administrations.

Sri Lanka has created a number of oligopolies in rice and maize collectors (generally referred to as mafia’s in local parlance) with the help of import taxes and a food license raj.

Sri Lanka opposition laments child malnutrition as farmers protected at Rs300 cereal tax

Sri Lanka minister mulls paths of self-sufficiency or economic freedom for 2023

Food imports are controlled based on economic nationalism or ‘self-sufficiency’ ideology or for import substitution to ‘save foreign exchange’. (Colombo/Dec12/2024)