Ruhuna Uni. VC denies allegations, refuses to resign amid strike

The Vice Chancellor (VC) of the University of Ruhuna, Senior Prof. Sujeewa Amarasena has categorically denied all allegations leveled against him and asserted that he will not resign from his position, despite mounting pressure and ongoing protests by academic and non-academic staff and the students’ unions.

The Vice Chancellor’s refusal of allegations came after the academic and non-academic staff together with the students’ unions launched a strike action on November 19, demanding his removal. The strike has escalated tensions within the university community, with protestors accusing the Vice Chancellor of misconduct and calling for his immediate resignation.

In response to the situation, a high-level meeting between Prime Minister Dr. Harini Amarasuriya and the University Trade Union Joint Committee was held yesterday. Despite the discussions, the trade unions expressed dissatisfaction with the outcome and pledged to continue their strike until their demands are met.

When inquired by Ada Derana, Senior Prof. Amarasena maintained his innocence, stating, “I have informed the Minister of Education, the Secretary, and the University Grants Commission that I categorically deny all allegations against me and have no intention of stepping down. Multiple investigations have been conducted regarding these claims, and I believe that sufficient evidence has not been come out to confirm the allegations. If the allegations had merit, I believe the government would have already taken action against me.”

He further dismissed the impact of the ongoing strike, saying, “I do not consider this strike successful. There are five faculties within the university that do not support these protests, and I attribute the lack of momentum to the weak and ineffective slogans of the protestors.”

However, the strike action launched by all academic and non-academic trade unions and Students Unions affiliated with the University of Ruhuna yesterday, demanding the immediate removal of the university’s Vice Chancellor, continued second consecutive day today (Nov. 20).