J’pura Uni-Port City Colombo publish academic case study

Focuses on Port City Colombo’s role in Sri Lanka’s economic transformation

The Faculty of Management Studies and Commerce, University of Sri Jayewardenepura, in collaboration with Port City Colombo, has co-authored and internationally published an academic case study and accompanying teaching notes for students, examining the project’s potential role in shaping Sri Lanka’s long-term economic future.

Published by Nova Publishers, New York, USA, the study titled ‘Port City Colombo: Catalysing Sri Lanka’s Emergence as a Global Investment Hub’, provides a multidisciplinary analysis of the project’s urban planning, strategic, economic, regulatory and sustainability dimensions.

The case study is featured as a chapter in the book ‘Is Sri Lanka Revitalising its Economy? An Analysis of Economic Policy and Technological Adoption’, edited by S. Perera, N. Nanayakkara, G. Samarakoon and S. Bamunusinghe and published under the 21st International Conference on Business Management, the flagship conference of the Faculty of Management Studies and Commerce.

The case study explores the transformational vision of Port City Colombo as a landmark urban development and special economic zone designed to support Sri Lanka’s transition from a traditional tourism and export-dependent economy to a dynamic, service-oriented and globally competitive investment destination.

“Port City Colombo is often discussed in terms of infrastructure and investment but the project is much more than that. It is about creating new economic opportunities for Sri Lanka and attracting industries that can support future generations,” said CHEC Port City Colombo (Pvt.) Ltd Managing Director Xiong Hongfeng.

The study was collaboratively developed by academics from the University of Sri Jayewardenepura, led by Management Studies and Commerce Faculty Estate Management and Valuation Department Head Prof. Prathap Kaluthanthri, together with representatives from CHEC Port City Colombo—the project’s master developer—led by Executive Director and Deputy General Manager Land Development and Marketing Shalaka Wijeyaratne.

“This publication offers a unique platform for critical thinking and evidence-based learning on one of the most significant development initiatives in the country – Port City Colombo,” said Management Studies and Commerce Faculty Dean Prof. Dushan Jayawickrama.