Sri Lanka voters need awareness to prevent another economic crisis: Legislator

ECONOMYNEXT – Sri Lanka voters need awareness to elect politicians who tell the truth to the public and prevent another economic crisis like in 2022, Parliament MP Wajira Abeywardana said.

President Ranil Wickremesinghe-led center-right United National Party (UNP) was brought down to an unprecedented one seat in the 225-member parliament during 2020 general elections after it put forward the needs for economic reforms.

However, the Sri Lankan voters gave a strong mandate to former president Mahinda Rajapaksa-led Sri Lanka Podujana Peramuna (SLPP) which promised a raft of subsidies and tax concessions. However, the party failed with wrong economic policies.

The SLPP faced public wrath when the economic crisis unfolded in 2022 and later its top leaders including President Gotabaya Rajapaksa were forced to resign in the face of strong mass protests.

“We told the truth and got defeated. We told the reality, then we lost. The last defeat resulted in with just one MP post,” Abeywardana told reporters in Colombo when asked what made his party to think that the people would elect Wickremesinghe again after rejecting him in multiple elections.

“The reason why he was later became as the president was because he told the truth and reality,” Abeywardana, a close ally of President Wickremesinghe and

“People never accepted the truth, but they did when they fell to the worst level (due to the economic crisis), When we sent him (Wickremesinghe) to the parliament, he told the same truth in the parliament.”

Once became the president, Wickremesinghe has put the country in a recovery path with the support of the International Monetary Fund (IMF). However, people have complained of high taxes and cost of living.

President Wickremesinghe will contest in the upcoming presidency under a common coalition, his allies have said. However, political analysts say, he would face a challenging task in convincing the voters given other political parties still giving false promises.

“We have to educate the people and make them aware about things nobody can deliver. People should be made understand that these people are promising what they can’t do and fairy tales. Because the same false promises have been repeated for the last 75 years,” he said.

“Specially, the new generation see the world. That young generation has changed. There is a deficiency in voter education and we have to carry on it to make them aware.” (Colombo/March 27/2024)