Sri Lanka’s new police ministers says no more political interference

ECONOMYNEXT — Sri Lanka’s newly appointed Public Security Minister Vijitha Herath has requested the police to help usher in a new political culture where the police is able to establish law and order without being subject to political interference .

Speaking to ministry officials and senior police officers on Tuesday September 24, Minister Herath said there has been a breakdown in public trust of the police.

“I, as the minister, the secretary and all of you as Deputy Inspectors General (DIGs) have a huge responsibility. I don’t think it can be done in a short period of time. But the police has an obligation to carry out their duty without political interference, and that is what we intend to facilitate,” he said.

Herath requested senior police officers gathered at event to help change existing, wrongful systems.

“We will give you full freedom for that. From your side, we expect you to maintain law and order independently without being subject to politicians’ interventions. Our ministers, MPs won’t be calling officers in charge (OICs) and demand that they do this or that. We won’t engage in that wrongful culture,” he said.

Referring to a comment by a DIG that 182 OICs had been appointed according to recommendations by local MPs.

“People of this country don’t expect such a system. Police OICs and senior officers must be appointed according to duty needs and administrative needs. From here on, such appointments must not be made according to the needs of the political authority.

“We will give that right and freedom. The secretary has that experience, so i think your work will be very easy for you,” he said.

President Anura Kumara Dissanayake appointed former Senior Deputy Inspector General (DIG) Ravi Seneviratne as the Secretary to the Ministry of Public Security on Monday September 23. Seneviratne had previously served as Senior DIG in charge of the Criminal Investigation Department (CID).

“What we ask you is to change the old system and take the country to a new political culture. The police has a big role to pay there. No matter who does wrong, even if it is someone politically supportive of us, do not give special treatment. Wrong is wrong. The law must be carried out properly. That’s what we expect and that’s why the people gave us this mandate. We hope that job will be done well,” said Herath. (Colombo/Sep25/2024)