“Eco Label: One Step, Great Change – Join the Transformation”

National Cleaner Production Center (NCPC), Sri Lanka, which was established by UNIDO and UNEP, a member of RECP Net with the collaboration of Gesellschaft für Internationale Zusammenarbeit (GIZ) GmbH organized a high -level forum: “Eco Label: One Step, Great Change – Join the Transformation”.

The Deutsche Gesellschaft für Internationale Zusammenarbeit (GIZ) GmbH, a specialized agency which provides services in the field of international development cooperation and international education work. The organization’s self-declared goal is to deliver effective solutions that offer people better prospects and sustainably improve their living conditions. The project “Promoting climate-friendly products through eco-label and green public procurement (SCP Outreach)” mainly focuses on sustainable public procurement and Eco-labels which have gained significant importance in the Southeast Asian region in recent years. With the support of the International Climate Initiative (IKI), Thailand, Malaysia, Indonesia and the Philippines have successfully started to introduce Green Public Procurement (GPP) systems and eco-labelling schemes.

The high- level forum organised at the Galadari Hotel gathered leading business professionals representing different sectors such as tea, dairy, construction chemicals and products, textile, ceramic and porcelain, office furniture, office equipment and supplies and paper and packaging material. Officials representing ministries, Heads of government institutions, and NGO’s. The Chief Guest of the High- level Forum was B.K Prabath Chandrakeerthi (Attorney at Law), Secretary to the Ministry of Environment. The guest speech on “Eco Labelling for Prosperous Future” was delivered by Ms. Wilasinee Poonuchaphai, Project Co-Director, SCP Outreach in Asia –The Next Five, Deutsche Gesellschaft für Internationale Zusammenarbeit (GIZ) GmbH.

In addition,.Samantha Kumarasena, CEO, NCPC; and .Hiroyuki Kobayashi, Deputy Manager (Promotion Section) Japan Environment Association presented speeches at the event . The event featured success stories in the textile industry, with representatives from Hayleys Fabric PLC and TeeJay Lanka PLC highlighting their experiences and business benefits derived through the implementation of eco-labeling Sri Lanka.

Currently, Eco Label Sri Lanka programme has developed four different eco label criterias ranging from Agrifood sector (Dairy, Tea) to Construction Chemicals and products of paint, steel, cement and to textile and textile based products. At the High- level Forum three leading companies Hayleys Fabric PLC and Teejay Lanka PLC representing textile sector, Quick Tea (Pvt) Ltd representing Tea sector were awarded the Eco Label Sri Lanka certification.

Dialog’s “genie Business” Hosts the First Transaction in Sri Lanka at the inauguration launch of India’s Unified Payment Interface (UPI)

Adora Cosmetic Centre by Hemas Hospitals celebrates 5 years of excellence

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.