Third quarter financials highlight 30% PBT growth for Aitken Spence in FY 2025/26

Spanning tourism, maritime and freight logistics, strategic investments and services, with operations across the region, Aitken Spence PLC, with a legacy of over 157 years, continues to pursue excellence. The Group recorded revenue of Rs. 67 billion for the nine months ending 31st December 2025, underscoring a robust performance across its portfolio of industries. The Tourism sector accounted for 68% of Group revenue, while the Maritime & Freight Logistics sector and Strategic Investments sector contributed 18% and 12% respectively. Furthermore, the Group’s revenue for the third quarter improved by 3.8%, reflecting steady performance across key sectors.

The Group’s total Profit Before Tax (PBT) stood at Rs. 5.6 billion for the nine months ending 31st December 2025, compared to Rs. 4.3 billion in the corresponding period of the previous year, reflecting a growth of 30%. Correspondingly, the Group’s Profit After Tax improved by 42% to reach Rs. 3.4 billion.

The Tourism sector recorded the most notable improvement during the period under review, reporting a Profit Before Tax (PBT) of Rs. 2.0 billion for the nine months ended December 2025. This performance was primarily attributable to the sustained recovery and growth of the tourism industry in Sri Lanka. In addition, the sector benefited from significant improvements in profitability at the Group’s Maldivian resorts, as well as enhanced operating performance across hotel operations in India and Oman.

The Group’s Maritime & Freight Logistics sector was the largest contributor to Profit Before Tax for the period under review, reporting a Profit Before Tax of Rs. 3.3 billion. Sector performance, however, was moderated by lower volumes and margin pressures, particularly impacting overseas freight and airline operations. This was reflected in the reduced contribution from the sector’s equity-accounted investee for the period.

In the Strategic Investments sector, the key contributing segments of printing and plantations both recorded stellar performance for the period under review despite the challenging market conditions of these industries, while the power generation segment witnessed a steady performance with notable contributions from the Waste-to-Energy and renewable power generation operations. However, the significant losses incurred in the apparel manufacturing segment impacted the overall performance of the sector, resulting in a loss of Rs. 652 million at PBT level.

The Services sector recorded strong growth during the period under review, driven primarily by the expansion of operations at Port City BPO, the Group’s most recent investment. This performance was further supported by improvements in performance by the Group’s elevators segment. As a result, the Services sector reported a Profit Before Tax of Rs. 843 million, compared to Rs. 114 million in the corresponding period of the previous year.

Aitken Spence PLC became the first and only diversified holdings company in Sri Lanka to have its climate targets validated by the Science Based Targets Initiative (SBTi).

Green Minds: A new platform to rethink environmental governance in Sri Lanka

‘We cannot stop our parents from ageing, but we can change the way they age’

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.