Only fractional division in government over 22A – Bimal admits

Colombo, Sep. 26 (Daily Mirror) - For the first time, Leader of the House Bimal Rathnayake admitted in Parliament yesterday that, though the government has always maintained a unified approach, there was a fractional division over the 22nd Amendment to the Constitution, but the opposition would not be able to exploit it to its advantage.

He said that the opposition remarked about internal divisions in the government over the 22nd Amendment to the Constitution, and it was purely to gain political mileage.

“Our government never took divisive action. If there is any, it is the minor division caused by the 22nd Amendment. It was fractional. We have our calculation on it. However, the opposition will never be able to get political mileage from it. The opposition benchers have got bowled out in the game. This is because people are not concerned about it,” Minister Rathnayake said.

“The opposition spread falsehoods on the 22nd Amendment. They misled the international community and the religious leaders. They lied to religious leaders. Religious leaders usually make remarks without studying the situation. The opposition also deceived local and international organisations as well. These international organisations did not utter a word against the 18th Amendment when it was introduced,” he said.

The Leader of the House said that a cartel of leading lawyers should not hold sway in this sector.

There was one senior lawyer who said Rubicon has been crossed when former President Ranil Wickremesinghe was arrested. However, he was also silent when the 18th Amendment was introduced,” he said.

“The NPP will govern the country until 2029. People will decide on the fate of the nation at the election in 2029,” he said.

The Minister said this piece of legislation is not aimed at fulfilling any political ambition.

“We have seen constitutional amendments introduced to increase the number of terms which an Executive President could serve, while some amendments were aimed at extending the term of Parliament. We wanted to reform this country in every sector. The judiciary is also part of it. There are a number of issues pertaining to the judicial system today. The system is dominated by a few judicial officers. There are even a few lawyers who are said to be specialised in getting accused persons bailed out. These few lawyers are recommended to be retained if someone has to be bailed out. What our government intends is to change these matters and reform the entire judicial system,” he said.

He said the government trusts all judges, including magistrates, in this legislative process.