Sun Match honours founder’s legacy with ‘Navatha Avidimu’

Sun Match Company, the market leader and first company in Sri Lanka to produce wax coated safety matches under the trusted household brand ‘Soorya’ and manufacturer of incense, candles, and hygiene products, honoured the 21st death anniversary of its Founder, the late T.R.R. Rajan at an event recently held on 31 January 2024. The company marked the solemn anniversary by continuing its two-decade-long landmark corporate social responsibility initiative, ‘Navatha Avidimu’.

The ‘Navatha Avidimu’ initiative, dedicated to providing prosthetic limbs to underprivileged amputees, not only meets a critical need but also brings light to the lives of these individuals. Going beyond mobility, the initiative offers education and awareness to help recipients and support rehabilitation towards reaching their full potential in life and society. The recent event held was graced by the presence of Brand Ambassador Yashodha Wimaladharma, along with the Chairman Deshamanya Suri Rajan and staff of Sun Match Company.

Sun Match Director and Chief Marketing Officer Gowri Rajan said, “The ‘Navatha Avidimu’ initiative is a testament to Sun Match Company’s enduring commitment to all communities. In commemorating the 21st death anniversary of our visionary Founder, the late. T.R.R Rajan, we not only honour his legacy but also provide amputees with prosthetics that symbolise hope, resilience, and the unwavering spirit of progress. Through ‘Navatha Avidimu,’ we also continue to light the way, creating paths of empowerment and transformation for those who inspire us with their strength.”

The late T.R.R. Rajan was instrumental in the revitalisation of the Centre for Handicapped, Kundasale. The Centre, an approved charity by the Government of Sri Lanka, is involved in identifying patients and manufacturing the limbs and has been a beacon of hope for many. During his tenure as Centre President T.R.R. Rajan successfully partnered with globally reputed agencies such as USAID and NORAD, alongside the Government of Sri Lanka to support manufacturing and distributing prosthetic limbs to all, regardless of ethnic background or gender.

Despite challenging economic and business conditions, the company has unwaveringly supported the program for 21 consecutive years. Importantly, Sun Match Company is the only company in its category to engage continuously in a CSR project of this magnitude.

With a strong commitment to corporate social responsibility, the company aspires to make a meaningful difference in the lives of Sri Lankans. Through ‘Navatha Avidimu’, Sun Match not only helps individuals walk again but also offers them the opportunity to reintegrate into the workforce, leading dignified, independent lives.