CMA Sri Lanka and SAFA to host int’l seminar on  Cost Accounting and Cost Audit in Electricity Sector

The Institute of Certified Management Accountants of Sri Lanka (CMA Sri Lanka) and South Asian Federation of Accountants (SAFA), will conduct an International Seminar on ‘Implementing Cost Records, Cost Accounting and Cost Audit for the Electricity Sector in South Asia’ on 12 October at the Taj Samudra, Colombo, from 8.30 a.m. to 2.00 p.m.

The seminar will bring together leading management and cost accounting, finance, energy and regulatory professionals from Sri Lanka, India, Pakistan and Bangladesh to share regional experiences and best practices in cost management in the electricity sector.

Key areas to be discussed include maintenance of Cost Records, Cost Accounting Standards, Cost Audit, Regulatory Accounting inPower Generation Thermal -Fuel and Coal,Transmission, Distribution and Renewable Energy, including Mini Hydro, Solar and Wind Power.

The Inaugural Session will includeProf. Lakshman R. Watawala, President of CMA Sri Lanka, who will deliver the welcome and introductory remarks.Mahendra Jayasekera, Chairman of the CMA Sri Lanka Cost and Management Accounting Standards Board (CMASB), will address Cost Accounting Standards, Cost Records and Compliance for the Electricity Sector.

Mohammed Humayun Kabir, President of SAFA, will share South Asian experiences in improving financial transparency, operational efficiency and competitive pricing in the electricity sector. The keynote address on “Restructured Electricity Industry, Regulatory Oversight and Achieving Efficiency, Productivity and Least Cost” will be delivered by Damitha Kumarasinghe, Director General of the Public Utilities Commission of Sri Lanka (PUCSL).

The international practices in the South Asian Region will feature distinguished speakers from across South Asia, including CMAAbdul Matin Patwary FCMA, Vice President ICMA Bangladesh onAchieving Sustainable Cost Efficiency in the Electricity Sector with Mandatory Cost Records, Cost Accounting and Cost Audit; ; CMA Dr. Raja Ghosh, GM (Finance) Corporate Planning, West Bengal State Electricity Distribution Company Limited, India onA Study on Cost Audit and it’s Relevance in the Power Sector with special emphasis on Discoms - A Review; and CMA Zia Ul Mustafa, Chairman, Public Sector Advisory Committee, Past President ICMA Pakistan and SAFA on Costing, Cost Control, Power Generation and Tariff Setting in the Power Sector in Pakistan.

Sri Lankan experts will also contribute their perspectives, including Dr. S. Nihal Fernando, Chief Financial Officer, National System Operator (Pvt) Ltd, on costing in the power generation sector, and Dr. Narendra de Silva, General Manager, Lanka Electricity Company (Private) Limited (LECO), on costing and pricing in the electricity distribution industry.

A high-level panel discussion will explore practical challenges and opportunities in implementing effective cost management practices in the electricity sector. The panel will be moderated by Dr. Tyrell Roche, Member Cost and Management Accounting Standards Board of Sri Lanka (CMASB), with participation from senior industry and regulatory representatives including Eng. N.G. Saliya Panditharatne, CEO, Electricity Generation Lanka (Pvt) Ltd; Kanchana Siriwardena, Deputy Director General (Industry Services), PUCSL; Muhammad Yasin, President, ICMA Pakistan; and Mafaz Ansar, Chief Financial Officer, Vidullanka PLC.

The seminar will conclude with the Valedictory Address by Prof. Lalith Chandralal, Chairman of PUCSL, Special Guest of Honour.

The programme is designed to provide a valuable international platform for finance professionals, Cost and Management Accountants, policymakers, regulators, energy-sector professionals, academics and industry leaders to exchange knowledge and identify practical approaches to achieving greater efficiency, productivity  and cost competitiveness in the electricity sector with benefits to the society.

CMA Sri Lanka and SAFA invite professionals and stakeholders in the electricity and accounting and audit sectors to participate in this timely international forum and gain valuable insights into modern cost management practices and their role in achieving efficiency, transparency and sustainable growth in the power sector.