MSF – a rare voice of humanity amidst rising brutality

At first blush it may seem that Israel’s war of aggression against the Palestinians is paying off, considering that Israel is having a virtual ‘free hand’ to achieve its aims in the contested territories but there is considerable superficiality in this viewpoint. This is on account of the fact that with each passing day more and more civilians in the Gaza, for instance, are being brutalized by the aggressor and the effects of this process of brutalization could prove prohibitively costly for all concerned.

Brutalization has the effect of converting even the most politically neutral sections into militants and intractable rebels and this process could eventually do grave harm to any prospects of peace and reconciliation. Given the considerable complexity of the ‘Middle East question’ and other ongoing conflicts of its kind, a positive outcome that peace-inclined sections of the world community could work toward right now is the protection of the minds and hearts of civilian publics from the devastating ill-effects of these wasting conflicts, to the extent possible.

‘MEDECINS SANS FRONTIERES’ (MSF) or ‘Doctors Without Borders’, as it is popularly known, has been aiming to achieve the above and allied peace-linked objectives over the years. Active in more than 70 countries, some of its primary aims are to ‘provide medical assistance to people affected by conflict, epidemics, disasters or exclusion from healthcare.’ Its actions are ‘guided by medical ethics and the principles of impartiality, independence, neutrality and accountability.’ More information on the organization is obtainable on www. msfsouthasia.org.

On September 19, to emphasize the role of communities in ‘shaping humanitarian healthcare’, MSF held its 2025 edition of ‘Scientific Days Asia’ in Colombo. This year’s edition was themed, ’Co-Creating Health: Listening, Learning, Leading – Community Voices in Healthcare Innovation.’ The international forum brought together researchers, activists and community leaders ‘to confront systemic failures and demand accountability in global health’ among other laudable aims.

The 2025 edition was hosted in collaboration with the Faculty of Medicine, University of Colombo and the Sarvodaya Shramadana Movement of Sri Lanka. The venue of the forum was the Galadari Hotel, Colombo.

At the inception of the conference, Dr. Parthesarathy Rajendran, Executive Director of MSF South Asia said, among other things: ‘Communities, patients and survivors are not beneficiaries to be spoken for, but equal partners who carry living knowledge essential for solutions.’

Rajendran added: ‘Listening, learning and leading alongside communities is not charity – it is justice……Knowledge is not meant to sit in journals or conference halls. It must travel into policy, into practice, into systems that touch people’s lives – particularly those on the margins. Research without translation is a missed opportunity for justice.’

Dr. Vinya Ariyaratne, Head of the Sarvodaya Shramadana Movement of Sri Lanka elaborating on the forum’s aims said; ‘In our journey towards health equity, it is imperative that we move beyond viewing community members as mere beneficiaries or passive recipients of health services. Instead, we must see them as active partners – collaborators, innovators and co-creators of health solutions…..Listen attentively and genuinely to community voices from the whole of South Asia and elsewhere.’

In her keynote address Prof. Devi Vijay of the Indian Institute of Management of Calcutta, raised these relevant queries besides making thought-provoking observations: ‘How may we retrieve care from its corporatized, depoliticized format today, and construct care as a more radical act? How may we reclaim care commons, built on solidarities across differences, internationalisms, sans frontiers? People on the ground, at the frontlines, have constructed concrete alternatives – care cooperatives, commons, community economies flourish in abundance across the world. Are we listening?’

Meanwhile, by way of a disclaimer, MSF pointed out that ‘the views expressed by individual speakers at the MSF Scientific Days Asia 2025 are their own and do not necessarily reflect the official positions of MSF. The conference is intended as a platform to encourage dialogue, debate and collaboration among stakeholders engaged in strengthening healthcare delivery, protecting humanitarian principles, and advancing solidarity in crisis-affected settings.’

The central themes of the conference were amplified in the sessions that followed and gave listeners much to think about in terms of particularly peace and reconciliation the world over. Broadly, there are two main approaches to establishing internal stability in conflict-ridden countries. One is by way of enforcing law and order and the other is through the fostering of reconciliation and bonding among warring groups on the basis of humanity.

The first approach, unfortunately, is much favoured by states facing internal conflicts and wars. Sri Lanka, for the greater part of its struggle against LTTE militancy, tried out this approach. It is also used by states attempting to exercise control over territories that it intends to annex. This is essentially what Israel is trying out in the Gaza and other contested territories.

However, this approach to establishing stability does not pay off in the longer term. One reason for this is the grave psychological and bodily harm suffered by civilian populations in particular at times of war. The grave mental harm suffered by civilians, for example, either take time to heal or don’t heal at all.

The latter is a silent but potentially explosive frontier that requires to be watched and restored to normalcy by health authorities the world over and those sections that aim at fostering wellness in all its dimensions. For example, it could be gathered that MSF is in the forefront of this effort of fostering comprehensive wellness among those population groups and communities that have experienced the worst of internal conflicts.

Accordingly, post-conflict peace-building, for example, is impossible minus listening and learning from the experiences of war-affected communities. While physical healing is comparatively easy to achieve, the same could not be said of psychological traumas.

To achieve the latter to a satisfactory extent doctors and other healthcare workers would need to tirelessly treat, listen and care for the latter category of patients. Besides, inputs gathered from such work must be made to inform policy making and implementation. MSF is engaged in such work and their efforts would need to be closely studied.

However, such work requires selfless dedication. One of the highest points in the MSF forum was the two minutes’ silence the attendees observed for those MSF healers who have lost their lives in ongoing conflicts and wars, while carrying out their responsibilities towards their patients and wards. This columnist hopes that the sacrifice made by these health workers would be closely emulated by their counterparts everywhere.

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.