Sri Lanka cabinet asks parliament to deal with CB salary hike row: Minister

ECONOMYNEXT – Sri Lanka’s cabinet has asked the parliament to deal with the central bank’s steep salary hikes as it was considered a matter for that branch of the government, spokesman Bandula Gunawardana said.

Sri Lanka’s Central Bank which has been given ‘independence’ by a controversial new law which critics say has legalized money to be printed for growth, along with a high inflation target, steeply raised salaries after flawed operational framework triggered a steep currency collapse.

Senior central bankers were summoned to the Cabinet of Ministers.

“Various ministers expressed their opinions,” Minister Gunwaradana told reporters. “I do not want to repeat them as some cabinet discussions are considered secret.

“However, they explained that officers will leave if competitive salaries are not given.”

Asked why office assistants were given wages close to 190,000 rupees which was lower than a Minister, and if that was required to keep trained people, Minister Gunawardana said it was decided that parliament should handle it.

“There are unions and other demands,” Gunawardana said. “They will explain this to the parliament.

The salary of Central Bank Deputy Governor’s has been increased to around 1.7 million from 974,965, reports said.

Justice minister Wijedasa Rajapaksa said while the central bank had the legal power to increase salaries it was not ethical (sadacharathmaka ne) to have done so in such a large proportion.

However, Minister Gunawardana said the it was explained that the central bank had in the past also raised salaries as they wished without asking the Treasury.

Harsha de Silva, Chairman of the Parliament’s Committee on Public Accounts said the ethical move has been to have some proportionality in raising salaries.

Due to the existence of the central bank and its tendency to print money through various tools to mis-target rates without a clean floating exchange rate, Sri Lanka has exchange controls, trade controls, currency depreciation, high inflation, endless stabilization programs, social unrest and political instability, critics say.

The central bank’s operational framework deteriorated sharply after the IMF’s Second Amendment to its articles in 1978, briefly improved under Governor A S Jayawardana analysts have said.

Its operational framework deteriorated sharply after the end of a civil war, with money being printed for growth (targeting potential output), triggering currency crises in rapid succession and eventually driving the country into default.

The policy errors contained in the deeply flawed operational framework, involving targeting inflation (a domestic anchor) without a clean floating exchange rate has now been legalized, critics say. Similar operating frameworks are found in other defaulting countries like Ghana.

Economists in the classical tradition has called for meaningful reform to restrain the agency, and eliminate glaring anchor conflicts in its flawed operating framework and to reduce the inflation target so that it does not get goal independence as well.

However it has been revealed that the current inflation target of 5 percent, gusting up to 7 was recommended by the macro-economists itself and the political leadership accepted it without protest.

The central bank has busted the currency from 4.70 to the US dollar at independence to 310 now. The rupee collapsed fro 200 to 360 to the US dollar in a float failed by a surrender rule in 2022,  (Colombo/Mar 05/2024)