SLT-Mobitel-Peradeniya Uni pioneer SL’s 1st AI-integrated engineering degree

SLT-Mobitel is the University of Peradeniya’s Technology Partner in introducing the country’s first-ever Bachelor of Science of Engineering Honours in Electronic and Intelligent Systems Engineering, equipping the next generation of engineers to lead the future of intelligent technologies.

Commencing in August 2026, the pioneering programme is designed to integrate electronics with artificial intelligence (AI) and prepare graduates to shape the next phase of intelligent technologies. The degree is set to transform the higher education landscape by combining deep electronic engineering knowledge with advanced AI, embedded systems and automation.

The students will gain exposure to cutting-edge fields including robotics, quantum computing, cloud-based AI and sustainable technology and engage in project-based learning, industrial training and research initiatives.

The university is also building Advanced AI stacks, including a PFLOPS-class GPU cluster at the faculty to support this initiative. Additionally, SLT-Mobitel’s expertise in AI, digital transformation and national-scale technology projects will provide the students with valuable real-world exposure.

Developing the next generation of AI-ready engineers is a natural extension of SLT-Mobitel’s commitment to innovation that improves lives, strengthens businesses and advances national priorities. Building on SLT-Mobitel’s existing engagement with the University of Peradeniya through knowledge-sharing, industry exposure and technology collaboration, the partnership will be further strengthened through this AI-integrated degree.

As the University’s Technology Partner, SLT-Mobitel will help embed AI across the learning journey by supporting applied research and development, enabling industry internships and co-creating real-world solutions that bring together electronics, embedded intelligence and automation.

To-date, SLT-MOBITEL has consistently supported higher education in Sri Lanka, investing in digital infrastructure for universities, enabling e-learning platforms, and nurturing innovation through collaborative projects with academic institutions.

The initiative further highlights the company’s commitment to empower the next generation of Sri Lankan engineers and innovators, ensuring the country is at the forefront of technological advancement.

The collaboration also positions Sri Lanka at the forefront of intelligent-systems education, empowering the students to engineer AI-powered solutions for telecommunications and networking, manufacturing and Industry 4.0, healthcare and medtech, agriculture and precision farming, energy and utilities, transport and logistics, financial services, defence and public safety, retail and consumer technologies, media and entertainment, education and learning technologies, smart cities and infrastructure, environmental monitoring and sustainability-focused innovation, grounded in ethical and responsible use of AI.