Sri Lanka’s culinary strengths engagingly explored

Issue no.1 of a ground-breaking journal on Sri Lankan food and culture has just been launched and it’s such an engaging ‘read’ that it just cannot be put down by the reader until s/he reaches the last word in the publication. Titled ‘ROOTED’ it is a publication of Rooted Publications Pvt. Ltd. Colombo (www.rootedsrilanka.com).

This is no run-of-the-mill journal on local ‘culinary delights’. It is a profoundly empathetic, sensitive exploration of the uniqueness of Sri Lankan food and the cultures of the country. In other words, it’s a close, appreciative examination of what makes the native food of Sri Lanka and its cultures special and hard to replicate and replace.

Writers of the arrestingly illustrated articles in ‘ROOTED’ have apparently spared no pains to travel the length and breadth of Sri Lanka to unravel, with mesmeric pleasure, the food and drink offers at the heart of Sri Lankan cuisine. The food connoisseur has all his curiosities satisfied in the journal and cannot prevent his taste buds from being stimulated on reading the contents of the journal.

Regardless of geographical or physical location what Sri Lanka has to offer its own people or the visitor to the country by way of particularly indigenous dishes and meal spreads are made to come alive in these pages. The connoisseurs and food experts are taken on an entrancing journey into homes transformed into family restaurants, aromatic eateries and bustling market places with sizzling catch along the sea coast of the island to its interior in this appetizing survey of Sri Lankan food.

What is distinct in terms of food and drink to the different ethnicities and cultures of the land are rendered in larger-than-life eye-catching portrayals via the pen and the lens. Consequently the journal not only celebrates food but also its distinctive cultural roots and identities. That is, people are serenaded alongside food.

In the process, the ‘ambul thials’, the ‘ala thel and brinjal badums’, the ‘thilapia curries’, the multifarious, ‘mouth-burning sambols’ and heady ‘Arrack shots’ experimentally mixed, to name just a few such offers of food and drink with a uniquely Sri Lankan stamp on them, are made to come alive in ‘ROOTED’.

The magazine has been put together by an editorial team headed by editors Chadini Fernando, Vidya Balachander and they need to be commended on a job well done.

David Pieris Automobiles opens Sri Lanka’s first GWM Flagship Experience Centre

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.