How agroecology promotes food security and economic stability

Addressing the 3rd Nyeleni Conference at the National Institute of Cooperation Development in Kandy, Lili Balogh of Nyeleni Europe and Central Asia called for urgent transformation of food systems, stressing that agroecology can deliver both ecological balance and economic stability.

“Across Europe and Central Asia, we are building territorial, feminist and people-based economies, scaling up short and agroecological supply chains and promoting the right to food, Balogh said.

She added: “These models not only strengthen communities but also ensure resilience against economic and ecological crises. Systemic transformation is now or never.”

Participants at the Kandy gathering noted that agroecological supply chains, biodiversity protection and farmer-led cooperatives could directly benefit Sri Lanka. By reducing dependence on costly imports like chemical fertilizers and hybrid seeds, the country could save vital foreign exchange while strengthening local production.

‘Friends of the Earth Sri Lanka’ chairman Hemantha Withanage emphasized the urgency for Sri Lanka to seize these opportunities:

“Agroecology is not only about protecting the environment; it is an economic lifeline, Withanage said. “If Sri Lanka invests in farmer-centered food systems, we can cut our import bill, create thousands of rural jobs and ensure food sovereignty at a time when global markets are increasingly unstable.”

The Nyeleni Conference, named after a Malian woman farmer who symbolizes global food sovereignty struggles, brought together farmer leaders, youth activists and policymakers. It highlighted that strengthening collective organization, defending biodiversity and resisting corporate-driven food systems are as much economic imperatives as they are ecological and social ones.

British national honoured for heroic efforts in Ella bus tragedy

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.