SL envoy seeks stronger India partnership while safeguarding sovereignty

Colombo, Aug. 19 (Daily Mirror) - Sri Lanka’s High Commissioner to India Mahishini Colonne has stressed the need to protect Sri Lanka’s sovereignty, territorial integrity and strategic autonomy while further strengthening its strategic partnership with India.

Addressing the 66th Course of India’s National Defence College (NDC) in New Delhi on Tuesday (18), Colonne described the relationship as “a partnership between unequal states, but not between unequal interests,” while emphasising that both countries share fundamental interests in peace, stability, prosperity and security in the Indian Ocean.

Speaking on “India–Sri Lanka Bilateral Relations: Determinants, Status, Opportunities, Challenges and the Way Forward,” she said the two countries were deeply interdependent and noted Sri Lanka’s consistent assurance that its territory would not be used in a manner that threatens India’s security interests.

At the same time, she underscored the importance of safeguarding Sri Lanka’s sovereignty and strategic autonomy.

Colonne highlighted the recent momentum in bilateral relations, including President Anura Kumara Disanayaka’s State Visit to India in December 2024, Indian Prime Minister Narendra Modi’s visit to Sri Lanka in April 2025 and the first-ever bilateral visit to Sri Lanka by an Indian Vice President in April 2026.

She also recalled India’s swift humanitarian assistance to Sri Lanka following Cyclone Ditwah in November 2025 under Operation Sagar Bandhu.

The High Commissioner said India’s support during Sri Lanka’s 2022 economic crisis, including critical emergency assistance and its role as the first bilateral creditor to provide financing assurances for Sri Lanka’s IMF programme, had also contributed to wider regional stability.

Her address covered trade and investment, connectivity, energy cooperation, defence and security ties, maritime cooperation, digital connectivity and the Colombo Security Conclave.

She also highlighted public goodwill as an important strategic asset, referring to a Pew Research Centre survey published on August 13 which found that 79 percent of Sri Lankans surveyed had a favourable view of India, the highest rating for India among the 36 countries covered by the survey.

Colonne identified six priorities for taking the bilateral partnership forward: building mutual trust, strengthening shared prosperity, accelerating connectivity, developing an integrated maritime security partnership, investing in people and exploring opportunities for India and Sri Lanka to jointly contribute to the wider Indian Ocean region.

The High Commissioner had also addressed the 65th NDC course in August 2025.

Following her address and an interactive question-and-answer session, Colonne also met a delegation of NDC officers who are scheduled to visit Sri Lanka from August 31 to September 2 as part of their study tour.

Established in 1960, the National Defence College is India’s apex institution for the study of national security and strategy. Sri Lanka has been sending senior officers and officials to the institution for more than five decades