Japlan Shades and Styles takes world of beauty to new heights

In a glamorous event that took place in Colombo recently, Japlan Consumer Private Limited hosted Japlan Shades and Styles Anniversary Bash and Product Launch.

The occasion looked back at Wella Professionals’ four years of presence in Sri Lanka with Japlan Holdings Ltd., a diversified joint venture between Japan’s TBK and its Sri Lankan collaborators, which started importing, marketing, and distributing the World’s No.1 hair-care brand, within the country.

The event featured the unveiling of a treasure trove of world-class, innovative Wella products, including Color Fresh and Color Touch, adding new dimensions to its illustrious legacy which has continued since 1880 when it started in Germany.

Japlan also made use of the glittering event to introduce IKONIC professionals to the Sri Lankan market as the one and only exclusive distributor in Sri Lanka.

IKONIC, a brand that has established its presence at the forefront of salon equipment manufacturing in the UAE and India, brings creativity and elegance to the vast field of style and beauty, altogether.

Japlan Holdings, the sole distributor and marketer of Wella and IKONIC in Sri Lanka, also entertained the elite gathering with an exclusive hair show exhibition – another first in Sri Lanka, showcasing the company’s role as a trailblazer in organizing such esteemed extravaganzas biennially.

This year’s event also celebrated the diverse and vibrant world of hair colours, offering a visually stunning experience that promises to explore new horizons of styles. With the gathering of beauty industry legends, the glamorous spectacle was a blend fusion of talent, innovation, and expertise.

This stunning event received beauty industry luminaries, including top salon and cosmetic traders from across the nation.

Japlan Shades and Styles was more than just a celebration; it was a testament to Japlan’s commitment to excellence and a tribute to the timeless appeal of beauty and style.

BOC records over Rs. 503 billion worth transactions via its service touch points during this Avurudu Season

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.