HNB Assurance ranked among Lanka’s top 40 best workplaces by Great Place to Work

HNB Assurance PLC has been recognized by Great Place to Work Sri Lanka as one of the Top 40 Best Workplaces in the country and was also proudly placed 09th among large-scale organizations.

This recognition is based on feedback directly from employees and a thorough assessment of the company’s culture and efforts to build a positive and supportive work environment.

Lasitha Wimalaratne, Executive Director / CEO of HNB Assurance PLC, stated, “We are truly proud to be ranked among the best workplaces in Sri Lanka and I’d like to convey my sincere thanks to Great Place to Work for this recognition. What makes this award meaningful is that it reflects the culture we have built together. Our people are the driving force behind our success, and as we move forward, we remain committed to creating a workplace they can continue to feel proud to be a part of.”

HNB Assurance has been consistently recognized for its people-focused practices, with previous honours including being named one of Asia’s Best Workplaces, a Women-Friendly Workplace, and a Company with Great Managers. These recognitions reflect a journey of continuous improvement, one where the company has taken deliberate steps to strengthen its culture, support its people and create a workplace that evolves with their needs.

“This award means a lot to us because it comes from our own people”, stated, Navin Rupasinghe, Head of HR / DGM, HNB Assurance. “We have always believed in creating a workplace that’s fair and open and this is a journey which requires continuous listening, learning and adapting. As for this award, we are extremely proud of how far we have come, but we are even more excited about where we are heading, with our people at the heart of it all.

Trinity Global rolls out LTW 200 and BO2, driving Lanka’s e-mobility shift

SampathCards & Hilton Colombo Collaborate to Offer Premium Lifestyle Privileges

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.