US markets extend falls, steep fall in Japan

ECONOMYNEXT – The US markets extended losses extending rout started last week, while Asian markets also fell with Japan, a country with very low interest rates.

On Monday, the Dow Jones Industrial Average fell 1,033 points, which is about 2.6 percent,  S&P 500 lost 3 percent and the Nasdaq composite 3.43 percent on top of losses last week as fears of unemployment rose.

The biggest fall was in Japan, which has the central bank with the lowest nominal interest rates with the Nikkei falling 12.4 percent.

The Yen has been falling against the US dollar for some time.

US markets have been skating on thin ice for some time, with the US broad money supply shrinking in absolute terms and banks credit also falling.

Markets were buoyed by claims that upcoming rate cuts by the Fed would lead to lower rates, despite classical economists who were watching money supply data warning that a recession was ‘baked in the cake’ not due to earlier rate cuts that fired artificial demand.

Sri Lanka could get hit from a disorderly US tumble: Bellwether

That full ’employment policies’ pursued by central banks as advocated by Cambridge-Saltwater ‘economists’ lead to greater unemployment was explained by classical economists.

“In fact, … the very measures which the dominant “macro-economic” theory has recommended as a remedy for unemployment, namely the increase of aggregate demand, have become a cause of a very extensive misallocation of resources which is likely to make later large-scale unemployment inevitable,” economist Freidrich Hayek said in his Nobel prize-winning speech in 1971.

“The fact is that by a mistaken theoretical view we have been led into a precarious position in which we cannot prevent substantial unemployment from re-appearing; not because, as this view is sometimes misrepresented, this unemployment is deliberately brought about as a means to combat inflation, but because it is now bound to occur as a deeply regrettable but inescapable consequence of the mistaken policies of the past as soon as inflation ceases to accelerate.”

Oil prices also fell despite fears of a war in the Middle East, bucking the usual trend of rising.