Second edition of ‘SIRIMAVO - Steering the Destiny of a Nation’ published

The Bandaranaike Museum Committee has taken step to publish the second limited edition of the Pictorial Biography; ‘SIRIMAVO - Steering the Destiny of a Nation’ in collaboration with the Sarasavi Bookshop and it is now available for sale, the Bandaranaike Museum Committee said.

It said the book was published due to various request from the public here and abroad.

The first edition of this book showcasing rare archival photographs depicting the remarkable public life of Mrs. Sirimavo Bandaranaike, who made history in July 1960 as the world’s first woman Prime Minister, was released in March 2022 as a limited publication, and was sold out within few months, the Committee said in a statement.

This coffee table book, ‘SIRIMAVO- Steering the Destiny of a Nation’ presents the remarkable story of Sirimavo Bandaranaike, an extraordinary Prime Minister who pioneered new paths in both national and international arenas.

Emphasizing photographs, it offers a fresh perspective on her impactful legacy.

This 444-page book comprises approximately 300 exceedingly rare and historically significant photographs, with the noteworthy aspect that the majority of these images have never been published before.

The book ‘SIRIMAVO - Steering the Destiny of a Nation’ is published under the auspices of the Bandaranaike Museum Committee and edited by three esteemed professionals in their own feilds; Sarath Perera, Nalaka Gunawardena, and WMK Wijayabandara. Distribution is handled bythe ‘Sarasavi Bookshop.

The foreword ofthe book ‘SIRIMAVO- Steering the Destiny of a Nation’ was penned byDeshmanya MDD Peiris, a distinguished administrative officer who served as the Prime Minister’s Secretary during the second term of Mrs. Sirimavo Bandaranaike.

The introduction to the publication was written by Dr. Ranjith Cabral the former director of Bandaranaike Centre for International Studies (BCIS).

Mrs. Bandaranaike entered active politics following her husband’s assassination and served as the Prime Minister of Sri Lanka on three occasions; from 1960 to 1965, 1970 to 1977, and 1994 to 2000. During her first and second tenures, she concurrently held the positions of Minister of Defence and Minister of Foreign Affairs alongside her role as Prime Minister. She served as the Leader of the Opposition in Parliament on two occasions: from 1965 to 1970 and from 1989 to 1994.