ALFT Packaging shines as beacon of modern CI -Flexo innovation at Drupa Germany, 2024

ALFT Packaging, a prominent player in the flexible packaging industry, showcased the potential of Modern Flexo recently at Drupa 2024 held in Germany, the world’s largest trade fair for the printing and packaging industry and its technologies. Drupa Germany has been taking place every four years and reputed as a premier industry event all around the world.

Recognised as Miraclon’s Champion of Modern Flexo, ALFT Packaging was featured prominently at the trade fair for its innovative Flexographic printing techniques. Importantly it was the sole company selected from South Asia as a designated Miraclon Lighthouse project.

ALFT Packaging’s presence at such a high calibre event, highlighted its exceptional commitment to Modern Flexographic printing and collaboration with Miraclon to push the boundaries from conventional Flexo.

Today, ALFT Packaging has emerged as a trailblazer in the Flexible packaging industry by expanding its capabilities into Flexographic printing. The company’s commitment to innovation is evident in its state-of-the-art facility, which houses Miraclon’s cutting-edge technology and a highly automated W&H CI-Flexo press.

What sets ALFT Packaging apart is its unwavering dedication to process standardization and the adoption of best practices in Modern Flexography. The approach has enabled ALFT to challenge the limitations of traditional Flexo printing and consistently surpassed brand expectations.

Chathura Jayatissa, Managing Director, ALFT Packaging said, “We were honoured to have been featured at Drupa 2024 in Germany and showcase our capabilities. Our commitment to innovation and excellence in Flexographic printing has driven us to push the boundaries and we were proud to represent Sri Lanka on this global stage contributing to the advancement of the Flexographic Printing industry.”

Softlogic Stockbrokers’ investment platform “StockGPT” enhanced with Azure OpenAI Service

CEAT Kelani helps Monaragala’s rubber farmers keep their children in school

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.