Fuel crisis looms Friday as tanker owners threaten to stop deliveries

Colombo, Sep. 28 (Daily Mirror) - Fuel distribution to filling stations across the country could come to a standstill from Friday (25) if authorities fail to revise fuel transportation charges in line with the latest fuel price increase, the Ceylon Petroleum Private Tanker Owners Association (CPPTOA) warned today.

CPPTOA Chairman A.M.H. Adhikari said the association had requested a revision of fuel transportation charges in 2025, with discussions held to implement the revised rates from January 2026. However, no revision had been implemented so far.

He said the association had held several rounds of discussions with the relevant authorities but had failed to receive a favourable response.

“Therefore, the CPPTOA decided to meet the Chairman of the Ceylon Petroleum Corporation (CPC) today. The Chairman assured us that a solution would be provided by this Friday (25),” Adhikari told the media.

He said the recent increase in fuel prices had significantly raised the operating costs of fuel bowsers, while the prices of spare parts, tyres, tubes and servicing charges had increased by more than 50%.

“These increased costs have made it extremely difficult for the association to continue fuel distribution services,” he said.

Adhikari said fuel distribution was an essential service and that tanker owners had continued their operations despite the rising costs to prevent any disruption to the country's fuel supply.

“However, we have now reached a point where we can no longer bear these costs. That is why we have decided to take this decision,” he said.

He warned that failure to resolve the issue could result in fuel distribution to filling stations being halted across the country.

Meanwhile, several private bowsers had already stopped transporting fuel, contributing to fuel queues at a number of filling stations, he said.

The association will decide on further action based on the response from the CPC Chairman, Adhikari added.