International recording stars, global icons…in our scene!

Quite a few of our local artistes describe themselves as international recording stars…and global icons!

Of course, we would love to have such performers in our midst, but, unfortunately, none of these artistes come into either of the categories – International Recording Stars, or Global Icons.

According to informed sources, International Recording Artistes are individuals who have gained recognition, and acclaim, for their singing talents, and contributions to the music scene, on a global scale, with world-wide chart hits, etc.

The difference is that artistes who are recognised by their country are National artistes, while International artistes are recognised globally…the whole world.

As for Global Icons, the rise of K-Pop has been phenomenal, with groups like BTS, BLACKPINK, and EXO dominating the charts and breaking records, worldwide.

Their catchy tunes, intricate choreography, and strong social media presence have propelled them to global superstardom, setting new trends in the music industry.

I would also classify Olivia Rodrigo and Taylor Swift as present day Global Icons. Of course, there are many more.

Olivia Rodrigo has already cemented herself as one of the hottest new music icons of the twenties because of her chart-topping album ‘Sour’ with smash hits ‘Good for You’ and ‘Driver’s License’, emerging as global chartbusters.

Taylor Swift has been a music icon since the early 2000s and dropped some of the biggest albums of the millennium, but the twenties may still be her most significant decade yet as she has re-recorded and released Taylor’s Version of many of her hit songs and records and they have turned out to be chart-topping hits – world-wide.

Where local artistes are concerned, some of them are being hyped up way beyond their capabilities and these performers just keep blowing their own trumpet, at every given opportunity, with hardly anything new to offer the international scene.

In today’s ever-evolving music industry, the influence of foreign music cannot be overlooked but have any of our artistes been able to do the needful with their music – capture the international music scene, on a global scale…and I mean a global scale.

Except for bassist Hussain Jiffry, playing bass for Herb Alpert and wife Lani Hall’s quintet, who took home a Grammy, when the group won the Best Pop Instrumental Album Award in 2014, we have absolutely nothing to our credit,

The Indians have won several Grammys, with fusion band Shakti winning Best Global Music Album at the 2024 Grammy Awards in Los Angeles

Tanvi Shah, Indian’s first woman to win a Grammy Award (for her performance in the song ‘Jai Ho’ from the movie ‘Slumdog Millionaire’), was seen in action at the Dubai International Stadium, early this year, and cricket enthusiasts and music aficionados witnessed a unique collaboration between two subcontinent legends and a talented musician.

Cricketers Danny Morrison and Wasim Akram, along with Tanvi Shah, created a dynamic trio that blended the sport of cricket with the brilliance of music.

What a day it will be if ever we win a Grammy or have one of our artistes top the charts in the scene that matters – UK Top 10, Billboard Top 10, or World Singles Chart.

High Commission in Nairobi hosts International Vesak Day at UN Office

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.