UN Subcommittee on Prevention of Torture concludes second visit to Sri Lanka

The UN Subcommittee on Prevention of Torture (SPT) has concluded its second visit to Sri Lanka, which took place from 15 to 24 June.

During the visit, the four-member delegation of the SPT met Foreign Affairs, Foreign Employment and Tourism Minister Vijitha Herath and Justice and National Integration Minister Harshana Nanayakkara.

At the meeting held on 15 June, the two Ministers highlighted the Government’s zero-tolerance policy towards torture and reaffirmed its firm commitment to the protection of human rights, and to constructive engagement with treaty bodies in a spirit of cooperation and dialogue.

As part of its mandate, the SPT delegation also met senior officials representing key Ministries, Departments, and institutions at the Foreign Affairs, Foreign Employment and Tourism Ministry premises on 15 June. The meeting, which was co-chaired at the senior official level by the Foreign Affairs, Foreign Employment and Tourism and Justice and National Integration Ministries, included representatives of the Public Security and Parliamentary Affairs Ministry, Defence Ministry, Health and Mass Media Ministry, Women and Child Affairs Ministry, Rural Development, Social Security and Community Empowerment Ministry, Attorney General’s Department, Sri Lanka Police, Department of Prisons, Department of Probation and Child Care Services, Department of Immigration and Emigration, National Dangerous Drugs Control Board, and Bureau of Rehabilitation.

During the discussions, the stakeholders elaborated on the legislative, administrative, and institutional reforms and measures that have been undertaken, and those currently in progress, to ensure effective implementation of the Government’s policy on the prevention of torture.

During the visit, the SPT delegation also met the Human Rights Commission of Sri Lanka (HRCSL), which serves as the National Preventive Mechanism (NPM) under the Optional Protocol to the Convention against Torture (OPCAT), the Judicial Service Commission, and representatives of civil society organisations.

A debriefing session was held with Government stakeholders at the conclusion of the visit on 23 June, during which the SPT delegation presented its preliminary observations. The SPT acknowledged Sri Lanka’s commitment to the prevention of torture and ill treatment and appreciated the facilitation of unhindered access to detention centres and the cooperation received from the Government throughout the visit.

Sri Lanka engaged with the Subcommittee in an open, constructive, and transparent manner, consistent with its policy of cooperation with the UN, and in fulfilment of its treaty body obligations undertaken voluntarily.

The SPT delegation comprised Delegation Head Aisha Shujune Muhammad (Maldives), Jakub Julian Czepek (Poland), Anica Tomsic (Croatia), and Nika Kvaratskhelia (Georgia). The delegation was accompanied by officials of the SPT Secretariat based in Geneva, Switzerland.

This was the second visit undertaken by the SPT since its first visit to Sri Lanka in April 2019, following the country’s accession to the OPCAT in December 2017.