WFD marks transition of Coalition for Inclusive Impact as an independent organisation

CII Board Member and Centre for Policy Alternatives Executive Director Dr. Paikiasothy Sarawanamuttu

CII Member and Selyn Group Chief Growth Officer Selyna Peiris

CII launches flagship leadership program the Inclusive Political Leaders Academy (IPLA) 2026

Westminster Foundation for Democracy (WFD) recently marked the Coalition for Inclusive Impact (CII)’s formal transition from a WFD-supported programme to an independent entity with a dedicated secretariat.

CII’s strategic direction, priorities, and future partnerships were shared with key stakeholders during the event. It was an opportunity to connect with political leaders, civil society, development partners, and other key stakeholders committed to inclusive and accountable governance.

During the event, Deputy British High Commissioner Theresa O’Mahony stated that The UK remains committed to supporting Sri Lanka’s institutional strengthening, financial oversight mechanisms, transparency, and inclusive governance practices through Westminster Foundation for Democracy, .

During the reception, CII launched its flagship leadership program, the Inclusive Political Leaders Academy (IPLA) 2026, designed to equip politically active individuals with the knowledge, skills and networks required to govern inclusively and effectively. A cohort of 20 participants, drawn from recognised political parties, will be selected for a blended programme of training, peer learning and mentorship and will be eligible for fellowships that offer hands-on placements with Members of Parliament, party offices or party leadership teams.

MP Shanakiyan Rasamanickam highlighted CII’s role in strengthening parliamentary engagement, noting the critical importance of cross-party cooperation alongside media, private sector and civil society actors to sustain oversight and inclusive policymaking.

CII Co-Chair Dilakshinee Angunawela set out the coalition’s ambition to deepen technical research, convene structured policy engagements, expand meaningful pathways for women, youth and underrepresented communities, and translate inclusive dialogue into actionable recommendations for policymakers.

The panel discussion during the event examined CII’s practical approach and future priorities. The panellists included WFD Country Director and CII Co-Chair Sanje Vignaraja and Centre for Policy Alternatives Executive Director and CII Board Member Dr. Paikiasothy Saravanamuttu, and Selyn Group Chief Growth Officer Selyna Peiris.

The panel emphasised CII’s distinct value in bridging politicians and civil society, urging identification of political champions for reform and broader public engagement on issues such as constitutional change., they also underscored the network’s power and called for tangible, time-bound private-sector engagement from the outset of policy processes.

WFD established CII (in the aftermath of the 2022 economic crisis, to ensure policymaking processes better reflect the lived realities of those most affected. Since then, the coalition has consistently convened parliamentarians, civil society, media, youth, women and private sector representatives to embed marginalised perspectives in economic and governance policy. Having become an independent entity in 2024, CII’s formal launch marks a new chapter in which the coalition will consolidate its role as a credible platform for structured, cross-sector engagement that translates dialogue into tangible policy outcomes.

CII’s development has been made possible by early and sustained support from partners including WFD and the UK International Development Aid.

WFD is the UK’s leading democracy support organisation, working to strengthen democratic governance around the world through programmes, expert guidance and research. WFD has strengthened democratic processes in Sri Lanka since 2015, by building transparent and accountable institutions, improving institutional trust, and supporting women, youth, the LGBT+ community, and persons with disabilities (PWDs).

CII is a cross-sector platform connecting political leaders, civil society, private sector actors and communities to promote inclusive, accountable policymaking in Sri Lanka. Grounded in evidence and lived experience, CII focuses on economic inclusion, political participation, transparency and social cohesion to support sustainable national recovery and reform.