Lenovo strengthens its ground presence in Sri Lanka

Lenovo, the global technology company, recently announced the opening of the 3rd Lenovo Exclusive Store in Jaffna, Sri Lanka, marking a significant milestone in the company’s presence in the region. This announcement also underscores Lenovo’s larger commitment to further Sri Lanka’s digital transformation story unleashing the power of AI to drive intelligent transformation with purpose-built AI-ready devices, infrastructure, solutions, and services that empower industries, enterprises, and individuals.

Naveen Kejriwal, General Manager- Overseas Business, Consumer, Commercial & Tablets of Lenovo comments, “Our vision is to deliver smarter technology through cutting-edge products and solutions for our customers and partners. We will continue to deepen our investments in the country by bolstering our retail network and partner ecosystem to ensure they can take advantage of Lenovo’s pocket to cloud offerings”

Lenovo has been the #1 PC brand in Sri Lanka for four consecutive quarters and is committed to continue growing its market share in the country. The newly launched Exclusive store (LES) promises to enhance the overall purchase experience, encouraging customers to ‘Stay and Play’ with its unique UNIFY design. The new store is part of Lenovo’s growth plan for the region to expand its footprint rapidly in the country over the next 2 years.

“We are very happy to be part of Lenovo’s journey by making the latest products more accessible to the customers. The Lenovo Exclusive Store will showcase the latest range of devices in Jaffna. Customers of this region now can buy the latest range of Lenovo products in the comfort of their region.,” says, Jeyakumar, Owner JP Technologies who opened the Lenovo Exclusive store in Jaffna.

Lenovo has been strengthening its channel and partner distribution network and has introduced some of the latest and innovative device portfolios in Sri Lanka, which will further boost the digital infrastructure of the country and support the government’s Digital Sri Lanka mission. The company is collaborating with the Sri Lankan government to develop and implement digital solutions across various sectors, leveraging its expertise in devices, services, and artificial intelligence (AI) solutions.

Debt restructuring talks with Ad Hoc Group of Bondholders back on track, thanks to IMF

Lenovo experiencing ‘tremendous growth’ in SL under ‘Smarter Tech for All’ vision

Lenovo sets another milestone, becomes Sri Lanka’s no. 1 PC Brand in CY Q1 2023

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.