Gotabaya’s ignorance exposed via SC decision - Hirunika

Labels former President Gotabaya Rajapaksa a failure who was unable to even execute Executive Powers vested in his post

Claims Rajapaksa had signed documents after succumbing to pressure from Duminda Silva’s faction only to now be left humiliated

Says SC decision affirms that truth will eventually prevail despite influence wielded by financial, political, or media entities

Samagi Jana Balawegaya (SJB) former MP Hirunika Premachandra yesterday declared Gotabaya Rajapaksa as a complete failure as a President, notably even in executing the executive powers vested in him by the constitution.

She underscored this point, citing yesterday’s landmark Supreme Court’s decision to invalidate the Presidential Pardon granted by Rajapaksa to former MP Duminda Silva, who was convicted in the murder case of her father, veteran politician Bharatha Lakshman Premachandra.

During a press conference after the verdict, Premachandra, one of the petitioners in the case, remarked that Gotabaya Rajapaksa displayed ignorance, as evidenced by his failure to adhere to proper procedures in granting a Presidential pardon.

Premachandra claimed Rajapaksa had succumbed to pressure from Duminda Silva’s faction and signed the document to grant Silva a Presidential pardon, only to find himself ultimately humiliated after the Court ruling.

She remarked that the Supreme Court decision also affirmed that truth will eventually prevail, surpassing any influence wielded by financial, political, or media entities.

The MP opined that Silva killed her father for speaking out against drug trafficking activities, despite her mother’s warnings to refrain from commenting on such matters. “My father even informed Mahinda Rajapaksa about Silva’s activities but Rajapaksa ignored him. Had he heeded my father and resolved these issues my father would be alive today. Instead, he orchestrated a conflict between them,” she alleged. Premachandra also claimed her father’s killing was carefully planned and not a coincidence as claimed.