Halpé Tea honoured as ‘Runner Up in Food and Beverage Sector’ at National Business Excellence Awards 2024

Halpé Tea, a subsidiary of Vella Group of Companies has reaffirmed its commitment to quality and excellence by securing the ‘Runner Up in the Food and Beverage Manufacturing Sector’ Award at the National Business Excellence Awards 2024. The awards ceremony was organised by the National Chamber of Commerce in Sri Lanka. This recognition underscores Halpé Tea’s commitment to producing high quality blends of tea that meets international standards. The ceremony was held at the Shangri-La Colombo, celebrating the best performers across a variety of sectors.

The company has set industry benchmarks with exceptional processes and unique blends and is well reputed for its unparalleled tea products. This latest accolade follows a series of national awards won by Halpé Tea over the last year, which further cements its position as an industry leader. In 2023, the company was honoured with three national awards by the National Chamber of Exporters in Sri Lanka. They were named The Most Outstanding SME Exporter of the Year 2023 and received the Gold Winner Award in the Tea and Tea Products Sector. The company also won the Late Deshabandhu Patrick Amarasinghe Challenge Trophy.

Each of these accolades highlight the company’s constant performance and their dedication to excellence, showcasing its capability to compete and succeed on both local and international levels. The journey to this accolade is attributed to teams’ collective effort and the loyalty and support of customers, which have been instrumental in the recognition they have received.

“We are thrilled to have been honoured with the ‘Runner Up in Food and Beverage Manufacturing Sector’ Award, at the National Business Excellence Awards 2024. It is a true reflection of the hard work and dedication of our incredible team and the invaluable support of our loyal customers. We are truly grateful for this recognition, and we remain deeply committed to delivering the best tea products to our customers around the world.” Said the Aberathna Brothers, (Halpé Tea Co-Founders Chamara, Ranga, and Eranda Aberathna)

Going forward, Halpé Tea looks forward to building on this success and continuing on its journey of excellence in the tea industry. With its steadfast commitment to quality, excellence and innovation, the company aims to achieve greater heights in the years to come.