Flexiprint wins Best Exporter Award together with Merit Award for Manufacturing Category at Western Province Entrepreneur Awards 2024

Flexiprint Ltd., the leader in printing tea bag tags, envelopes and pyramid tags attached mesh announced that it has been honoured with the “Best Exporter Award” and the Merit Award for Industry/ Manufacturing sector – Large category 2024 at Western Province Entrepreneur Awards Ceremony awarded by National Enterprise Development Authority together with The National Chamber of Commerce of Sri Lanka that was held at BMICH on 11 December.

This prestigious recognition is given to Flexiprint excelling in their international trade and export performance. This award highlights their outstanding contributions to economic growth, innovation, and the global marketplace. The award recognises Flexiprint’s outstanding performance in international trade, its significant contributions to the global market, and its role in driving economic growth.

Flexiprint has consistently delivered high-quality products while adhering to the highest standards of safety, sustainability, and customer satisfaction to earn the Merit Award for Manufacturing Excellence. Flexiprint celebrates the commitment to innovation, operational excellence, and its outstanding contribution to advancing the manufacturing sector.

During 2024, Flexiprint has significant export growth and a proven track record of entering and sustaining presence in foreign markets in compliance with international trade laws and regulations.

Giving credence to the trailblazing personality of Flexiprint Founder and Managing Director Sathis Abeywickrama, who revolutionised the industry with his vision, dedication, and leadership, Abeywickrama established his mark in the printed packaging industry both locally and internationally in his illustrious career of well over four decades.

“Our team is thrilled and deeply honoured to receive this prestigious award,” said Sathis Abeywickrama. “This recognition is a testament to our dedication to quality, innovation, and forging strong partnerships worldwide. We are committed to continuing to bring our printing services worldwide, catering exclusively to Tea industry while upholding our values of sustainability and excellence.”

With a focus on cutting-edge technology and sustainable practices, Flexiprint has established itself as a trusted leader in the printing sector. Over the years, the company has introduced breakthrough products and services, reduced carbon emissions, implemented advanced materials and sustainable alternatives in manufacturing.

Flexiprint implemented robust training programs to up skill workers in advanced manufacturing technologies, creating a diverse and inclusive workplace that fosters innovation. Establishing a strong global presence by exporting to multiple countries, Flexiprint has expanded production facilities to meet international demand and has become the market leader in printing tea bag tags, envelopes and pyramid tags attached mesh (for pyramid tea bags) catering exclusively to the Tea Trade.

“This recognition is a significant milestone for our team,” said Flexiprint Director Isuru Abeywickrama. “The Merit Award reflects our relentless pursuit of excellence in manufacturing and our dedication to providing innovative and reliable solutions to our clients. We are grateful to NCCSL for acknowledging our efforts and inspiring us to continue raising the bar in our industry.”