Income status: Reality and challenges

The World Bank’s annual income reclassification, which takes effect every July 1, has placed Sri Lanka, Vietnam, the Philippines, Jordan and the Pacific state of Micronesia in the upper-middle income bracket.

Sri Lanka’s elevation to the upper-middle income status has gladdened many a heart. It is no mean achievement for a country emerging from a crippling economic crisis that led to foreign currency reserves woes, shortages, queues, prolonged power cuts, a steep rise in inflation, and unprecedented political upheavals. However, one should not lose sight of the fact that although the reclassification is a marker of resilience, Sri Lanka only narrowly crossed the threshold, according to economic analysts.

Sri Lanka will now face some challenges. The upper-middle income status generally indicates economic progress and can help improve investor confidence, which Sri Lanka perhaps needs more than anything else to rebuild its forex reserves and be ready to resume foreign debt repayment in earnest. However, a higher income category could reduce Sri Lanka’s access to concessional loans, grants and some forms of international assistance. Commercial borrowing generally carries higher interest rates and shorter repayment periods than concessional development loans.

Trade preference schemes such as the EU’s GSP and GSP+ have stood developing countries, such as Sri Lanka, in good stead. These trade concessions are based on specific eligibility criteria, not income classification alone, but moving into higher income categories can eventually affect eligibility under some preferential trade arrangements, as some economists have pointed out. There’s the rub.

The biggest challenge for Sri Lanka is to ensure that its economy will become more productive, competitive and resilient so that it can lessen its dependence on international assistance, with the help of sustainable growth and investment, as countries like Vietnam have done.

Policymakers should reflect on the state of the economy and ordinary Sri Lankans’ lot, which has not improved despite the country’s income classification upgrade. Such categorisations based on credible data may be technically sound and useful in making economic decisions, but they cannot be considered realistic and reliable yardsticks where the wealth distribution is concerned.

The upper-middle income status usually masks inequality. There are economic tools to gauge income inequality, which affects social stability, poverty levels, and access to education and healthcare, but they too have limitations. It is imperative that the issue of income inequality be addressed as a matter of national priority.

Sri Lanka faced an economic crisis in 2022, despite a previous income classification upgrade, mainly because it did not get its macroeconomic fundamentals right, and acted in a reckless manner. True, the Easter Sunday terror attacks and the Covid-19 epidemic took a heavy toll on the economy, but Sri Lanka would have been able to overcome their impact if its economic imperatives had not been subjugated to the political agenda of the government in power at that time.

If action had been taken to prevent a sharp drop in state revenue by keeping taxes at a realistic level and rationalising pandemic relief while seeking IMF assistance at the first signs of trouble, the economy may have been able to withstand internal and external shocks without going into a tailspin.

Sri Lanka should emulate Vietnam, whose income classification upgrade follows a different track and is a story of growth. Vietnam’s gross national income per capita exceeded the USD 4,636 threshold because of manufacturing export growth. Its GDP expanded at approximately 8 percent in 2025, driven by electronics and consumer goods assembly. Vietnam has reportedly set an ambitious goal of achieving the coveted high-income status by 2045. Sri Lanka, too, should raise the bar for itself and work towards achieving its economic goals.

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.