Crocodile ranked among LMD’s Top 10 Most Loved Retail Lifestyle Brands

Crocodile, a leading lifestyle brand renowned for its international acclaim, has been honoured as one of the top 10 most loved brands in the Retail Lifestyle category by LMD readers. This prestigious recognition comes from LMD’s Brands Annual Ranking 2024, via a survey conducted by prominent business magazine LMD in partnership with Brand Finance Lanka, a brand valuation and ratings firm of global repute.

Today, Crocodile stands as one of the most respected and well-known brands in the global fashion industry, with an extensive product line that spans the entire spectrum of men’s, women’s, and kids’ fashion. For over 70 years, Crocodile has been a leader in the fashion world. Since its inception in Sri Lanka, the brand has evolved as a forerunner in premium men’s fashion, synonymous with timeless comfort and elegance. In 2021, Crocodile expanded into the women’s fashion category and further expanded into kids’ fashion, specifically boys’ fashion, in 2024.

Ahamed Nifraz, General Manager of Crocodile, remarked, “This recognition is a testament to our dedication to aligning with the style and preferences of our customers, ensuring their utmost satisfaction. We remain steadfast in our promise to deliver products that resonate with the latest fashion trends, fostering trust and loyalty among our clientele. We extend our heartfelt appreciation to all our stakeholders and are committed to consistently providing exceptional value.’’

Crocodile’s stature in both the international and local contexts is a testament to its commitment to excellence. As a globally respected brand, Crocodile continues to set benchmarks in the fashion industry, catering to discerning customers with a penchant for exquisite luxury and sophistication.

Sunshine Holdings delivers record FY24 results propelled by Healthcare and Consumer sectors

Political uncertainty continues to cast pall of gloom on bourse

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.