Dialog offers unmatched convenience with eSIM, enabling effortless switching between iPhones & iPads

Dialog Axiata PLC, Sri Lanka’s premier connectivity provider and the authorised provider for Apple, has introduced the next major advancement in eSIM technology: the eSIM Quick Transfer feature. As a first in Sri Lanka and South Asia, this revolutionary service allows iPhone and iPad users to transfer their eSIMs between devices with unparalleled ease and convenience.

Following the increased popularity in eSIMS due to enhanced security and remote profile management capabilities, this initiative is poised to transform how customers manage their mobile connectivity, offering three scenarios for effortless eSIM management: the conversion of a physical SIM to eSIM directly through device settings, the easy conversion of a physical SIM to eSIM in a new device directly through iPhone or iPad settings, and the seamless transfer of your eSIM from old to new devices during data migration. To benefit from this feature, users must ensure that their device is an iPhone XS, iPhone XS Max, iPhone XR, or later, or that their iPad is compatible with eSIM technology. Additionally, both the iPhone and iPad must be updated to iOS 17.5 or later.

The launch of the eSIM Quick Transfer Feature follows the company’s previous launch of Dialog ONE NUMBER, a service that allows you to use the same number on both your iPhone and Apple Watch simultaneously, further reiterating Dialog’s dedication to providing seamless connectivity solutions while elevating the user experience. These initiatives also align with Dialog’s commitment to introducing simplified processes for its customers via digital channels, without the hassle of visiting a physical outlet.

Dialog remains steadfast in its mission to pioneer technological advancements that empower customers and drive digital transformation in Sri Lanka. For more information, https://www.dialog.lk/esim/self-activation.

People’s Leasing & Finance honors top marketers at inaugural CEO Club event

‘Record year for Sarvodaya Development Finance as profits and assets soar’

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.