Sri Lanka president took on task of stabilising economy, must now restructure debt: Patali

ECONOMYNEXT — Sri Lanka President Ranil Wickremesinghe’s claim that he alone took on the responsibility of stabilising the economy is valid, according to opposition MP Patali Champika Ranawaka who said the president now faces the challenge of restructuring external debt by June.

“[President Wickremesinghe] said ‘I have a bigger responsibility than holding elections. I have the responsibility of restructuring the country’s debt and stabilising the economy’. Now he has a challenge facing him. Domestic debt was restructured last year. He now has the challenge of restructuring external debt before June,” Ranawaka said speaking at an event on Sunday March 31.

“If he said local government elections would not be held because the economy has to be stabilised, he now has to restructure the debt before June. His responsibility i restructuring external debt by June and stabilising the country. That’s why he said “I took on this responsibility, no one else did”. All true. We expect him to fulfill his next obligation,” he said.

The opposition MP said that whoever wins Sri Lanka’s next presidential election will definitely dissolve parliament and hold parliamentary elections no sooner than he or she is elected.

“If there is a president in October, there will be an election in November,” he said.

Ranawaka made similar remarks previous week, when he said President Wickremesinghe must decide between sending the Rajapaksas back to parliament and restructuring debt by June to stabilise the country for the next decade.

Speaking to reporters, Ranawaka said Basil Rajapaksa, the ideologue of the ruling Sri Lanka Podujana Peramuna (SLPP), is well aware that his party cannot come into power through the presidential due to be held between September 17 and October 17 this year.

“Basil knows the Rajapaksas can’t come into power again through this election, so he’s trying to see if they can somehow hold a general election before that and enter parliament,” said Ranawaka.

“The president must decide what’s important, whether to send five Rajapaksas to parliament or to speak to our creditors and restructure our external debt by June and stabilise the country for the next decade,” he said. (Colombo/Apr01/2024)