Shattered dreams …

Bollywood heartthrob Shah Rukh Khan’s cancelled trip to Sri Lanka has certainly shattered the dreams of many Sri Lankans who were eagerly looking forward to catching a glimpse of their idol, on 2nd August, in Colombo.

Yes, SRK is in the States but, according to reports, it has nothing to do with any current health issues, or injuries sustained on the set of ‘King’.

Initially it was stated that he wasn’t coming due to unforeseen and unavoidable personal reasons, beyond his control.

According to NDTV (described as India’s most trusted news broadcaster), and as reported in the ‘Times of India’, recent rumours of Shah Rukh Khan’s injury on the set of ‘King’ and subsequent relocation plans are false.

The report went on to say that while SRK has had past injuries and travels to the US for treatment, his recent trip in July is routine.

They say he left for America in the second week of this month (July) and is due to return at the end of the month.

Obviously, one would like to know why he chose July for his routine treatment and care in the States when he was scheduled to visit Sri Lanka on 2nd August!

However, it’s a fact that SRK’s journey, especially in the film world, has been marked by a series of significant physical and medical struggles.

During the shooting of ‘Ra One’, the actor suffered a shoulder injury but he ignored it and went on to shoot for Rohit Shetty’s ‘Chennai Express’. His injury got aggravated as he tried to perform his own stunts. He also fractured his toe on the sets of the film.

On the sets of the movie ‘Happy New Year’, the actor suffered a knee injury. He was shooting for a song when a door fell on him and he hurt his face and head. He was rushed to hospital immediately.

During the promotions of ‘Dilwale’, SRK was suffering from a knee injury which occurred while shooting for ‘Fan’. However, due to back-to-back shoots for ‘Raees’ and ‘Dilwale’, he delayed his knee surgery.

Months before the release of the movie, ‘My Name Is Khan’, SRK underwent a shoulder surgery. The causes of the injury were attributed to an old accident that occurred during the shooting of ‘Dulha Mil Gaya’, as well as a possible shoulder dislocation while filming a fight scene for ‘Don 2’.

The actor, they say, has also had a long history of back problems, and has suffered from severe back pain that sometimes made it difficult for him to stand or walk – a prolapsed disc in his spine.

After trying remedies, which made things worse, the actor underwent a major spinal surgery in 2003 to correct this. It was a critical operation, and the recovery process was long and challenging.

After four days of shooting for Karan Johar’s ‘Kal Ho Naa Ho’, SRK had to undergo a complicated back surgery in Germany and the movie was delayed by six months.”

Wonder how many of his fans are aware that their superstar suffered from depression in 2010?

Shah Rukh Khan suffered from depression after his shoulder surgery in 2010 and, at that point in time, said: “Due to the shoulder injury and the suffering, I had got into a depression mode but now I am out of it. I feel happy and boosted with energy. I feel so much healthier and refreshed from within.”

During the shooting of the 1997 movie ‘Koyal’, the actor had suffered a hairline fracture on his kneecap, and during the shooting of the 1993 movie ‘Darr’, the actor suffered three fractures in the ribs.

Well, despite his towering success and immense fame, Shah Rukh Khan is certainly injury prone.

Ants figured out medicine, farming and engineering long before we did

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.