Ideal Motors secures multiple workplace excellence accolades

Ideal Motors representatives receive top organisational culture and workplace accolades at Great Place to Work 2026 awards ceremony

HR-led transformation places people, culture and business performance at heart of organisation

Ideal Motors (Pvt.) Ltd has achieved a significant milestone by securing multiple prestigious workplace and organisational culture accolades in 2026, reinforcing its position as an employer of choice in Sri Lanka’s automotive sector.

Among its latest achievements, Ideal Motors has been recognised as one of the 20 Great Workplaces for Young Talent in Sri Lanka 2026, ranked No. 1 and awarded the Gold Medal in the Small and Medium Category of Best Workplaces in Sri Lanka 2026 and ranked No. 18 among Best Workplaces in Asia in the Medium Scale Category—the highest-ranked Sri Lankan organisation in the category. The company also received Industry Excellence for Workplace Culture – Trading Industry.

The Young Talent recognition was presented at Great Place To Work CXO Forum 2026 held on September 10, 2026, at Cinnamon Life, Colombo. The recognition followed an evaluation of more than 100 certified organisations and highlights the workplaces that create meaningful opportunities for employees under 35 to develop, contribute and grow.

At Best Workplaces in Sri Lanka Awards Gala 2026, held on September 11, 2026, at Cinnamon Life, Colombo, Ideal Motors achieved another historic milestone by entering the Best Workplaces Sri Lanka list for the first time and securing the No. 1 Gold Medal in the Small and Medium Category. The company also achieved No. 18 in Best Workplaces in Asia, reflecting the strength of its workplace culture beyond Sri Lanka.

Group DGM HR and Administration said, “Our team continuously strives to bring the best practices, innovative ideas and meaningful firsts to the organisation through HR value addition.”

Ideal Group Managing Director and CEO emphasised, “The strength of Ideal Motors ultimately depends on the people who drive our business forward.”