Mujibur accuses President of attempting to remain in power while creating anarchy

SJB MP Mujibur Rahman says President is making concerted effort to undermine democracy and rule of law

Claims President Ranil Wickremesinghe is using various tactics to obstruct elections

Notes despite Wickremesinghe’s invitation, none of SJB’s MPs will support him

Slams President for working towards destroying judicial system and rule of law

Samagi Jana Balawegaya (SJB) MP Mujibur Rahman has accused President Ranil Wickremesinghe of trying to hold on to power while letting the country descend into anarchy.

Speaking at a press conference yesterday, Rahman criticised the President for attempting to violate the Constitution. “He is allowing the country to descend into anarchy for the benefit of himself and his group. He is also making a concerted effort to undermine democracy and the rule of law,” accused Rahman.

The SJB MP said the President is using various tactics to obstruct elections, including filing Fundamental Rights petitions on the President’s tenure and elections through various third parties and presenting the 22nd Amendment to the Constitution in Parliament.

Meanwhile, Rahman stated that despite Wickremesinghe’s invitation to the SJB to join him, none of the party’s MPs will support the President. “He knows he is unable to win with the group which bankrupted the country backing him. Therefore, he is inviting the SJB group to join him. However no SJB MP will extend their support to the President,” he said.

According to the MP, the President is afraid of the elections, but the law will not allow him to halt them. “He will have to hold elections whether he likes it or not,” he said.

Rahman also said that, during his tenure, the President has attempted to control the judiciary. Despite his facade of being a democratic leader, he is working towards destroying the judicial system and the rule of law.

He recalled that, despite Wickremesinghe’s claims of having no power to appoint an Acting IGP, it was Wickremesinghe himself who appointed former IGP C.D. Wickremeratne as Acting IGP on three occasions.

“The President is not only violating the Constitution to remain in power, but he is also attempting to create chaos and allow the country to descend into anarchy,” he alleged.

He assured that the SJB will defeat all conspiracies hatched by Wickremesinghe and emerge victorious in the elections.