Thousands rescued from devastating North Korea floods

More than 5000 people isolated by flooding in northwest North Korea have been rescued in airlifts and other evacuation work state media says was supervised by leader Kim Jong Un.

Heavy rainfall on Saturday caused a river on the North Korean-Chinese border to exceed a dangerous level and created “a grave crisis”, the official Korean Central News Agency (KCNA) said on Monday.

About 10 military helicopters and navy and government boats were mobilised for the evacuation efforts in Sinuiju city and Uiju town where flooding had isolated residents.

KCNA did not mention any deaths or how much damage the flooding caused. It said each of the about 10 helicopters made several fights to save the residents despite bad weather, ultimately rescuing 4200 people by air.

It said Kim guided the evacuation works on Sunday, ordered food and other necessities to be provided to affected people and set tasks for recovery and relief works.

KCNA cited Kim as calling the rescue works “miraculous” as more than 5000 people were saved.

Summer floods in North Korea often cause serious damage to farmlands due to poor drainage, deforestation and dilapidated infrastructure.

Typhoons and torrential rains in 2020 were among the difficulties Kim previously said had created “multiple crises” at home, along with draconian pandemic-related restrictions and UN sanctions over his nuclear weapons program.

During his visit to the flooded region, Kim scolded officials for lowering their guard, saying he had ordered efforts to prevent flood damage more than once, KCNA said.

“They, seized with defeatism at combat with nature, do not confidently turn out in the disaster prevention work, only expecting chance from the sky,” Kim said, according to KCNA.

Kim’s criticism could be seen as an effort to shift blame while establishing his own image as a leader caring about his people while North Korea struggles with economic difficulties and international isolation, observers say.