PSTA Bill differs from expert committee draft, Herath admits

Colombo, Oct. 9 (Daily Mirror) - The Government yesterday acknowledged that the Protection of the State from Terrorism (PSTA) Bill tabled in Parliament differs from the draft prepared by the technical experts’ committee, with Foreign Minister Vijitha Herath saying the Cabinet had made changes to the committee’s proposals as part of the normal legislative process.

Foreign Minister Herath said that changes were made to the draft by the Cabinet of Ministers and that it is a normal practice to do so.

Responding to a question from MP Shanakiyan Rasamanickam, Minister Herath said the original draft had reflected the differing views of members of the expert committee and that the Cabinet introduced additional proposals and amendments.

Rasamanickam referred to concerns raised by former Bar Association of Sri Lanka (BASL) President Saliya Pieris, PC, who said several provisions in the final Bill, including those relating to bail, had been changed from what had been agreed upon by the committee.

In response, Herath said it was not mandatory for the Cabinet to accept the committee's draft in its original form.

“It is normal practice to change the draft prepared by a committee. It is not compulsory to adopt the draft in its original form. A committee is appointed to facilitate the process,” he said.

The Minister also noted that the Bill could still be amended during the Committee Stage in Parliament. He added that the Supreme Court could also make determinations on the legislation, as the Bill has been challenged before the Court.

Meanwhile, Rasamanickam argued that the PSTA Bill was, in certain respects, worse than the existing Prevention of Terrorism Act (PTA).

Pieris, who served on the committee as a BASL nominee, has also alleged that the Bill tabled in Parliament contains significant deviations from the proposals agreed upon by the committee, particularly with regard to bail provisions and procedures for extending detention.

In a social media post, Pieris said he had identified the changes after reviewing the Bill presented to Parliament.