JXG reports LKR 2.28Bn Net Profit in Q1 FY26, signalling strong start to the year

Continuing its positive trajectory, Sri Lanka’s emerging financial conglomerate, JXG (Janashakthi Group), reported a consolidated net profit after tax (NPAT) of LKR 2.28 billion for the first quarter ended 30th June 2025.

The group’s positive performance was fueled by a robust 41% year-on-year (YoY) growth in consolidated revenue, which reached LKR 8.36 billion. These results were driven by outstanding contributions across the Group’s key business verticals, particularly insurance.

Janashakthi Insurance PLC, the Group’s insurance arm, delivered a strong NPAT of LKR 1.32 billion for the quarter under review, marking a significant 70% increase compared to the corresponding period last year. This performance was underpinned by new business premiums soaring by 73% in regular first-year premiums, reflecting the company’s focused efforts on customer acquisition and enhanced channel engagement.

First Capital Holdings PLC, the Group’s investment banking vertical, continues to be a pivotal contributor to the Group’s performance. The vertical recorded an NPAT of LKR 2.15 billion, a significant increase from LKR 582 million in same period last year. The Primary Dealing and Corporate Dealing Securities divisions contributed significantly to this performance by capitalizing on the moderate decline in interest rates to secure a strong market position in debt and equity securities.

Reporting its first-ever quarterly results as the rebranded Janashakthi Finance PLC, the Group’s finance and leasing vertical posted an NPAT of LKR 59.90 million for the quarter. Net operating income surged to LKR 671.59 million for the quarter, a 35% YoY increase, driven by an increase in interest income, and an expansion of its loans and receivables portfolio, which increased up to LKR 23.81 billion compared to LKR 16.61 billion in the same period last year.

Commenting on the Group’s performance, Chandan de Silva, Group Chairman of JXG (Janashakthi Group) stated, “This quarter’s results mark a meaningful milestone in our Group’s journey as a financial services group. The strong performances across our subsidiaries reflect the strategic clarity and executional discipline that guide our efforts. As we continue to strengthen our fundamentals and scale, we remain focused on delivering consistent performance and long-term growth.

Ramesh Schaffter, Managing Director/Group CEO of JXG (Janashakthi Group) added, “We’re pleased to report a strong start to FY26, with first-quarter results ahead of expectations. This encouraging performance reflects the strength of our team, and our ability to execute with focus and agility. While the broader Sri Lankan economy remains dynamic, we are committed to navigating the evolving environment with strength and discipline. Building on this positive momentum, we look forward to unlocking new opportunities to expand our contribution to the financial sector and the broader economy.”

JXG (Janashakthi Group) continues to accelerate performance across its core subsidiaries and deepening its commitment to operational excellence. The solid Q1 FY26 results lay a strong foundation for the remainder of the financial year, reinforcing the Group’s commitment to strategic execution and stakeholder value creation.(JXG)

Concessionary loan scheme introduced to encourage young entrepreneurs in the agriculture and industry sectors

Dialog Introduces Unlimited Speed-Based Fibre Plans for Seamless Internet Access

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.