Stirring call for biodiversity- driven economic revival

Sri Lanka’s leading business figures made a strong call for biodiversity-driven economic revival at the launch of the landmark book, ‘Discovery: Additions to the Flora of Ceylon’ authored by Dr. Himesh Dilruwan Jayasinghe, under the guidance of biodiversity scientist Dr. Rohan Pethiyagoda. The launch brought to the fore the inextricable link between nature and national prosperity—particularly tourism, agriculture, pharmaceuticals, and green growth.

Speaking at the event, at the ‘Genesis by Dilmah in Colombo’ recently, Malik Fernando, chair of MJF Leisure and co-chair of MJF Holdings, made a striking admission: “Despite Dr. Rohan Pethiyagoda calling me a naysayer, I’m actually a huge fan of nature, he said with a smile, adding that he had just booked out an entire hotel, some 2,500 copies of Himesh’s book, in anticipation of increased eco-tourism interest. “What Himesh has done is nothing short of remarkable. As the government rightly identifies tourism as the engine of economic growth, it is vital to remember that nature—our forests, wetlands, our 50 shades of green—is the core of that engine.”

Fernando stressed the pressing risks posed by environmental degradation, warning that biodiversity loss could cripple tourism—an industry that accounts for 15% of Sri Lanka’s GDP. “Our very economy is threatened by the vanishing of our biodiversity. Forests are drying out. Wetlands are shrinking. The unique experience Sri Lanka offers to travelers is under existential threat.”

He also called for sustainable tourism policies and emphasized the direct economic value of preserving biodiversity. “In a small island like ours, where you can travel from rainforests to dry zones within hours, our ecological wealth is our competitive advantage.”

Adding gravitas to the business case for conservation, Dilhan C. Fernando, chairman of Dilmah Tea, reminded the audience of the foundational role nature plays in crafting Ceylon tea—the country’s most iconic export. “Sunshine, wind, rainfall and soil—these aren’t just poetic elements, they are the architects of our tea, he said.

He shared a deeply personal narrative about his father, Merrill J. Fernando, the legendary founder of Dilmah, who built the business on a philosophy of kindness—towards people and the planet. “My father didn’t go to business school. He followed my grandmother’s principle of kindness. And that kindness extended to nature, because no business can flourish without it.”

The tea magnate stressed that biodiversity is not just a moral or ecological imperative, but a business necessity. “Over 50% of global GDP depends on nature. Forty-four trillion dollars. Just think about that. Whether it’s medicine, water, air or even advertising—there’s nothing more innovative or creatively complex than what nature produces.”

Fernando also cited the butterfly garden recently launched by Dilmah Conservation as more than just a conservation initiative. “It’s a design lab. A place where we study ecosystem services and food security. Butterflies aren’t just pretty—they’re indicators of ecosystem health, which is crucial for everything from agriculture to medicine.”

BRICS targeted in South Asia’s efforts to diversify textile exports – Industry specialist

Uber rolls into Jaffna – rides and eats now available in Northern Province

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.