Govt. lifts import control requirement for select pulses

Cabinet Co-Spokesman and Minister Bandula Gunawardena says move aims to eradicate profiteering, illegal importation of grains, protect domestic producers by imposing appropriate tax rates, quarantine methods

The Cabinet of Ministers at its meeting on Monday approved removing the requirement of obtaining an import control licence for the import of selected grains including mung bean, black gram, cowpea, finger millet, soy flour and peanuts.

The move is subject to the submission of a National Phytosanitary Licence issued by the National Plant Quarantine Service and taking necessary measures to protect local producers based on the recommendation of the Agriculture and Plantation Industries Ministry.

On 1 May, selected food grains and commodities classified under 126 Combined Classification Codes were subject to import control permit requirements. Issuance of import control license related to 53 combined classification codes has also been suspended.

“It has been found desirable to remove the requirement of import control license for import of food grains to achieve the multiple objectives of eradicating profiteering, illegal importation, unfair increases in retail prices, ensuring affordable price for the consumer and protecting the domestic producer by imposing appropriate tax rates and quarantine methods,” Cabinet Co-Spokesman and Minister Bandula Gunawardena said at the weekly post-Cabinet meeting media briefing yesterday.

He pointed out that prices of pulses have shot up to over Rs. 1,000 in the market, making it unaffordable for consumers. “A kilo of mung bean is Rs. 1,160, black gram Rs. 1,610, cowpea Rs. 1,008 and peanuts Rs. 1,200,” he cited the current market prices.

Considering the recommendations of the Committee chaired by the Secretary to the President, which comprised members including the Central Bank Governor, Treasury Secretary and Senior Economic Adviser to the President, Gunawardena said the Cabinet decided to remove the Import Control Licence requirement for the aforementioned selected grains. The proposal to this effect submitted by President Ranil Wickremesinghe in his capacity as the Finance, Economic Stabilisation and National Policies Minister was approved by the Cabinet of Ministers.