Sri Lanka loan demand up in second quarter

ECONOMYNEXT – Sri Lanka’s demand for loans from banks had continued to increase in the second quarter of 2024, backed by lower interest rates and exchange rate stability, a central bank survey showed.

Loan demand had increased in retail, corporate and small and medium enterprise sector, while demand from state enterprises had reduced.

“Reduced interest rates, economic growth, improvements in the business environment, relatively stable exchange rates and expansions in economic activities mainly attributed to the observed increase in demand,” the central bank said.

“In 2024 Q3, the expected increase in demand will primarily be driven by anticipated further reductions in interest rates, policy consistency, expectations on continued growth in economy, stabilization of foreign exchange rates, and recovery in key economic sectors,” the statement said.

“The expected increase in demand observed in the SOE sector during 2024 Q3 may be due to expectations of commencing new projects related to sustainable and renewable energy.”

The central bank has maintained monetary stability from late 2022, keeping the exchange rate stable and inflation around 2 percent, the level seen in stable countries to which people from Sri Lanka migrate to, giving a chance for people recover their lost economic footing.

When a reserve collecting central bank triggers a currency crisis by cutting rates with inflationary open market operations (liquidity injections), a surge in private credit is followed by high rates to prevent a further meltdown of the currency, triggering a so-called ‘stabilization crisis’.

As consumer demand collapses due to the fall in real incomes from the currency collapse or lost jobs, companies stop expanding, (creating excess capacity in some cases) and try to repay loans instead. It takes some time to design and start new projects.

Many loans issued during the period of liquidity injections go bad, driving up bad loans.

The central bank survey showed that loans going bad was reducing, though there were some new bad loans.