Apparel forum congratulates Sri Lanka’s new President

ECONOMYNEXT – The Joint Apparel Association Forum (JAAF) of Sri Lanka has congratulated National People’s Power leader Anura Dissanayake on being elected as the country’s new president.

The trade body highlighted the importance of the apparel sector, a key driver of Sri Lanka’s export-led growth, and expressed its support to the president and his team.

“We look forward to working closely with the new President and the Government to ensure the continued success of the apparel sector,” Secretary General of JAAF Yohan Lawrence said.

The Joint Apparel Association Forum (JAAF), Sri Lanka’s apex body for the textile and apparel industry, warmly congratulates NPP leader Anura Kumara Dissanayake on being elected as the new President of Sri Lanka.

As the country enters a new phase of leadership, JAAF highlights the immense importance of the apparel sector, a key driver of Sri Lanka’s export-led growth and a vital component of the nation’s economic competitiveness and expresses its fullest support to the President and his team in delivering the very clear mandate that the people of Sri Lanka have given him.

The new President’s vision for Sri Lanka is centered around creating a fair, just, and inclusive society, with a strong focus on eradicating corruption and uplifting the lives of ordinary citizens.

His commitment to transparency, good governance, and sustainable economic development aligns with the JAAF’s goals of promoting ethical practices and fostering long-term growth in the apparel industry.

Accounting for over 40% of Sri Lanka’s total exports, the apparel industry plays a pivotal role in the country’s economy.

Beyond generating significant export revenue, the sector provides employment to nearly a million Sri Lankans, supporting livelihoods and driving skills development across the country. The industry’s impact extends far beyond its direct economic contributions; it is a vital force in uplifting communities and enhancing the nation’s development.

“We look forward to working closely with the new President and the Government to ensure the continued success of the apparel sector,” said Yohan Lawrence, Secretary General of JAAF.