Tilvin expresses doubts on Premadasa’s participation in public debate

Criticises SJB’s reluctance to agree to proposed dates or suggest alternatives

Accuses SJB of employing evasion tactics instead of making efforts to face public debate

Reiterates its readiness for debate and urges SJB to confirm date instead of prolonging discussions

National People’s Power (NPP) Executive Council member Tilvin Silva yesterday voiced his doubts regarding whether Samagi Jana Balawegaya (SJB) leader Sajith Premadasa will indeed participate in a debate with NPP leader Anura Kumara Dissanayake.

Speaking at a press conference, Silva expressed the NPP’s confidence that Premadasa would not partake in a public debate. “That is why they continue to engage in a back-and-forth with us on this matter and make various assertions,” he said.

While the SJB has sought a meeting with the NPP this week to iron out the debate details, Silva criticised the SJB’s reluctance to participate in a debate on the dates proposed by the NPP or provide alternative dates.

“We proposed four dates assuming the SJB leadership’s busy schedule. Similarly, Comrade Anura is also occupied with various commitments. Despite his busy schedule, we offered four dates, considering the significance of the event,” he said.

Silva emphasised that the SJB should have selected one of the four proposed dates or offered an alternative instead of employing tactics to evade the debate.

“Instead he’s opting to postpone the debate to a later date, citing various excuses and creating confusion,” Silva remarked.

Silva explained that the NPP anticipated the SJB’s potential attempts to mislead the public, which is why they suggested four dates. “By offering multiple options, we aimed to prevent any claims of being unavailable on a particular date,” he emphasised.

Silva said making various claims and sending out letters is pointless and the SJB to tell the date they can engage in a debate. “They are making no attempt to face a debate and are instead employing various tactics to avoid it,” he accused.

The NPP had requested the SJB to choose either 7, 9, 13 or 14 May to hold a public debate between the respective party leaders. Despite the NPP’s proposal of multiple dates, the SJB has stood firm on Sajith Premadasa’s prior commitments, requesting a meeting with NPP representatives to discuss and plan the debate instead.