Brands … and brand names

I’m at the age where parties have become a chore rather than an outright pleasure.That is not quite true. There are some which I look forward to of course, but they tend to be small affairs with just close friends around, entailing minimal ‘fashion dressing’ with the accent on comfort rather than haute couture.

The ‘in crowd’ today, throw around brand names for every garment they wear, and it would not be an exaggeration to say most of my generation have not heard of them. We know of Christian Dior, Prada, and maybe Oscar de la Renta. but the ‘in crowd’ think very little of my clothes sense. In fact, they assume (quite rightly) that I have none at all as far as name brands go. Last year my USA living grand offspring, KitKat, viewed my six year old wallet with distaste.

“Rubbish. I paid Rs. 6000 for this and it is perfect. It was expensive five years ago and it looks new. Everyone wants to know where I bought it,” I bristled at her disbelieving look.

This Christmas she handed me a beautifully crafted, pure white wallet saying loftily, “It’s a Charles & Keith.”

“Gee. Thanks,” I replied, never having heard the name before.

At the next pay-for-yourself ladies lunch, I flourished my Charles & Keith wallet in everyone’s face. There was no reaction, so I felt explanations were needed.

“This is a Charles & Keith,” I told five other ladies. “Huh?”

“You know, a brand name.” (They had not heard of it either.)

“No idea!” and like much of my generation, brand names were not de–rigueur. But I went home and tackled KitKat.

I paled with shock at the answer. The new wallet was put into tissue paper carefully stored while my old one was lovingly resurrected. KitKat gasped in frustration knew better than to argue with her clearly old-fashioned grandmother.

In the meantime, the young set of Colombo carry on using brand names I’ve never even seen in the fashion magazines I occasionally read.

At a ladies lunch last year my friend Sumu pointed at a handbag lying by the chair at another table.

I was brought up to date on other facts. Apparently there exists a $20,000 bag in New York which a besotted Sri Lankan husband bought his wife who had everything and he did not know what else to give her.

I looked at my own bright red clutch bag, totally out of style but matching the piping of my own attire. Frankly it looked better than the over-the-top object of our attention but who am I to query the fashionistas of Colombo?

Saris are rarely seen on younger women of this era who prefer western attire. When I need to keep up with the ‘Brand Set’ I simply wear a sari. My ten-year-old Kanchipuram did excellently well in the fashion department at a recent wedding and nobody was able to date it. I now understand why Indian ladies preserve silk sarees and store them carefully. They last longer and are never out of style.

I once kept a Kashmir-silk trousseau sari for 17 years. When I wore it in that 17h year, Kirthi, Sri Lanka’s fashion reporter, thought I’d done a recent trip to India, so fresh did it look. Nor did I disillusion him.

Such subterfuges are not possible today in the non-sari department. Dresses are pegged instantly as bought far, far from Sri Lanka. Handbags and shoes likewise. Mind you I’ve been known to look at a pair of Jimmy Choos (a brand name shoe in case you are as ignorant as I am) and ask the outraged wearer if she had bought it at Lakshmis. She hasn’t spoken to me since.

The Spectacle Department is another area in which granddaughter KitKat is an expert. Born to a father from an Optician family, she can spot a fake at twenty paces.

“But how can you tell the difference between a Versace and a Gucci pair of sunglasses for heaven’s sake?”

“By the little green and red marking at the corners and other suchlike identifiers.

I am a competitive person by nature but in the fashion areas of this decade I am a complete loser.

Tissa Wijeyaratne at the foreign office and briefing on the KGB in London

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.