Driving the next wave of ports and logistics growth at SLEIS 2025

As Sri Lanka positions itself as a strategic hub in the Indian Ocean, the ports and logistics sector remains central to driving trade, attracting investment, and unlocking regional connectivity. Yet the next phase of growth cannot be built on scale alone – it must also align with global sustainability imperatives. On Day One (2nd December) of the Sri Lanka Economic & Investment Summit 2025, the sector deep dive “Ports and Logistics: Building a Competitive and Climate-Resilient Ecosystem” will explore how the industry can modernise to meet these dual demands.

The session will explore how Sri Lanka can develop a future-ready logistics ecosystem by investing in green infrastructure, accelerating digital transformation, and leveraging public–private partnerships. It will also bring practical insights on building competitive, climate-resilient systems through a keynote by Tim Miltenberg, a senior representative of the Port of Rotterdam, one of the world’s leading models in green port development.

Miltenburg – Head of the Decarbonisation Centre of Excellence, APM Terminals, The Hague, will be joined at the panel discussion by Admiral Sirimewan Ranasinghe – Chairman, Sri Lanka Ports Authority, Ruwan Waidyaratne, Managing Director, Hayleys Advantis, and Ms. Shehara de Silva – Managing Director, McLarens Group. The panel will be moderated by Romesh David, Chief Executive Officer, SAGT.

SLEIS 2025 is supported by: Platinum sponsors – Nestle, Standard Chartered Bank, Unilever, Bronze sponsor – South Asia Gateway Terminals, Session sponsor – Sunshine Holdings, Television Partner – Dialog Television, Telecommunications Partner – Dialog, Hospitality Partner – Shangri-La Hotel, Colombo, Strategic Partners – Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Department of Commerce, Ministry of Trade, Commerce, Food Security and Co-operative Development, Board of Investment, Export Development Board, Sri Lanka Convention Bureau, Strategic Development Partner – Asian Development Bank, Knowledge Partner – World Bank, and Official Airline – SriLankan Airlines.

The Sri Lanka Economic and Investment Summit will be held on 2nd and 3rd December at the Shangri–La Hotel Colombo. Early registration is encouraged to secure your place – register now at https://sleis.chamber.lk/. For more information, contact Alikie – 0115588805 / alikie@chamber.lk or Lilakshi – 0115588818 / lilakshi@chamber.lk.

Policy rate jitters seize bourse despite previous positive momentum lingering

NDB Bank partners with Ideal Motors to drive affordable leasing solutions

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.