Capital market content to be included in Sri Lanka’s proposed education reforms

ECONOMYNEXT – Sri Lanka’s financial market and education sector officials have discussed including capital market content into the proposed financial literacy curriculum under its new education reforms, the Securities and Exchange Commission said.

Financial literacy is one of 16 core skills essential for students in the 21st century, and comprises knowledge, attitudes, and behaviours necessary for making informed financial decisions, SEC Chairman Hareendra Dissabandara said.

“Financial literacy is not only an essential life competency,” he said, “but also a national solution that can address economic crises and reduce structural imbalances. Unfortunately, it is still largely confined to those who have studied Commerce subjects, when in fact it should be accessible to all.”

A financial literacy seminar was held at the Ministry of Education for stakeholders involved in ongoing education sector reforms to contribute to the integration of financial literacy into the school curriculum.

Financial literacy and entrepreneurship will be introduced as a compulsory subject carrying one credit from Grades 6 to 9 and will be offered as an optional subject at the GCE Ordinary Level, Education Ministry Secretary Nalaka Kaluwewa told the forum.

The seminar was attended by senior officials from the Ministry of Education, National Institute of Education, Colombo Stock Exchange (CSE), and CFA Society of Sri Lanka, and representatives from the Colombo Stock Brokers’ Association, and Unit Trust Association of Sri Lanka.

The SEC will support the National Institute of Education (NIE) by providing input on the financial literacy curriculum content and assist in teacher training.

There was an urgent need to embed financial education in schools, Dissabandara said, as “students are not taught how money works, how to manage personal finances, or how to use money for self-development,” and that curriculum reforms must bridge this gap by going beyond theory to include practical applications that foster real-world financial skills.

It was also important to adapt reforms and understand behavioral patterns of Gen Z, Gen Alpha, and future generations, he said.

Sulakshana Jayawardena, Director General (Corporate Affairs) Ministry of Finance said financial markets are constantly evolving, and the curriculum must remain current and relevant.

“Many people fall victim to financial scams such as pyramid schemes due to a lack of financial understanding,” Minister Anil Jayantha Fernando said. “Ironically, financial fraud is often perpetrated by individuals who are financially literate — but ethically compromised.” (Colombo/Jul18/2025)