SLT-MOBITEL shines on global stage with prestigious wins at 2024 ARC Awards

SLT-MOBITEL earned global recognition, securing Gold and a Certificate of Honour at the prestigious 38th Annual International ARC Awards held recently. The competition is acclaimed as the world’s largest annual report competition, felicitating companies having achieved an international mark of excellence in annual reports.

The Sri Lanka Telecom PLC Annual Report 2023 was adjudged the Gold Winner in the Illustrations: Telecommunications category for the annual report titled ‘We are an ‘App’ of Life’. The company was also awarded a Certificate of Honour in the Specialized AR – Integrated AR & ESG category.

The achievement celebrates SLT-MOBITEL’s world-class standards in annual reporting and reinforces its position as a leader in the telecommunications industry, in Sri Lanka and on the global stage.

The international acknowledgement also highlights SLT-MOBITEL’s commitment to transparency, creativity, and excellence in corporate reporting. The company’s innovative approach in presenting its annual report as ‘We are an ‘App’ of Life” resonated strongly with the judges, earning the top honours in the telecommunications sector.

Furthermore, the recognition in the Specialized AR – Integrated AR & ESG category also emphasizes SLT-MOBITEL’s dedication to comprehensive reporting on its environmental, social, and governance (ESG) initiatives.

The 38th edition of the ARC Awards, known as the ‘Academy Awards of Annual Reports,’ endorses the highest standards in producing annual reports. Only entries scoring in the top 30% are considered award-worthy, highlighting the significance of SLT-MOBITEL’s achievement. The 2024 competition received 1,550 entries from 32 countries, of which Sri Lanka Telecom PLC stood out, securing the accolades.

Pelwatte Dairy celebrates Children’s Day with special ice cream truck event and fun activities

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.