‘A Night To Remember’ with Alston and Fahmy

Generally we hear of Sri Lankan musicians, based abroad, doing exceeding well in their profession. There are also several others (non musicians) who excel in their respective professions in their adopted homeland.

In journalism, there’s one outstanding Sri Lankan who is shining bright…in Canada: Dirk Tissera, and he is efficiently supported by his wife Michelle.

Dirk is the Editor-in-Chief and Publisher of The Sri Lanka Anchorman, a tabloid newspaper that has been in circulation for the past 20 years.

What is special about The Sri Lanka Anchorman is its wide and varied content which Sri Lankan-Canadians eagerly look forward to reading.

In fact, in 2016 Dirk Tissera, received a top Toronto press award from the National Ethnic Press & Media Council of Canada (NEPMCC) for excellence in editorial content and visual presentation.

An old boy of St. Mary’s College, Dehiwela, he had his early grooming, in journalism, right here, in Colombo, and then moved to Canada, and is now based in Toronto.

Every year Dirk and Michelle make special plans to celebrate  The Sri Lankan Anchorman’s anniversary and this year is no exception.

This year’s 20th celebrations, one would say, is extra special as two of Sri Lankan’s top male vocalists, from Australia and the USA, will be in attendance.

According to Dirk, ‘A Night To Remember’ is the theme of this year’s 20th Anniversary Gala.

“We are specially flying in for the event Alston Koch from Melbourne, Australia, and Fahmy Nazick from Virginia, USA, who is back by popular demand to entertain his Toronto fans again.”

Desmond Sornabala will handle the evenings proceedings, as MC, and spinning the discs will be Toronto’s # 1 Sri Lankan DJ Chamil Welikala.

Says Dirk: “The Toronto crowds have been starved of good English songs for a long time but with Alston and Fahmy on the same stage, the atmosphere is bound be electrifying and they will certainly rock the night away.”

Dirk also mentioned that doors open at 6.30 PM, with door prizes and surprises, plus sumptuous dinner and dessert table.

Obviously the baila is very much a part of the Sri Lankan dance scene abroad, as well, and there will be a Baila and Jive competition at ‘A Night to remember,’ said Dirk, adding that DJ Chamil Welikala will be providing the baila and Hindi music when Alston and Fahmy take a break.

The Sri Lanka Anchorman’s 20th anniversary celebrations will take place on Friday, May, 31st, 2024, at the J&J Swagat Cenvention Centre, in Toronto, Canada.

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.