Curiosity never killed the cat in a culture of ‘question’ and ‘challenge’

Exemplary, and effective leadership is grounded, amongst others, in an insatiable desire to do things differently

Whilst acknowledging the importance of policies, procedures, and processes in maintaining discipline and order in an organisation, I also believe that it must have, parallelly, a deliberately structured platform, vehicle, or mechanism to arouse the curiosity, harness new ideas and ignite the innovation DNA of its leaders and employees. A haven for those individuals who, routinely, question existing norms and push for incremental improvement and innovative solutions. History shows that organisations have benefitted from these challengers

We have all had the experience of a dreary boss who, with his/her stifling, and controlling behaviour, routinely shot down our, and our team’s, progressive ideas in an environment where all that mattered to the boss was to get the job done by the stipulated timeline and in line with the prevailing rules and procedure.

The words of a senior, in my very early days as an accounts clerk, resonate in my ears: “Hey podian (small boy), don’t try to be too smart. Just do what you are told and don’t try to teach your grandmother to suck eggs.” The senior’s words confirmed to me that he was neither willing to listen to what I had to say nor was he willing to entertain any deviation from long established practices. Why should he? He had been in the organisation for a very long time, and he was recognised by his bosses, and the organisation, as a pair of safe hands. In this light, he did not have the desire, nor did he think it was important, to explore how tasks could be performed more effectively, imaginatively, or inventively.

He was a typical ‘frog in the well.’ He showed no keenness in inculcating a spirit of engagement, collaboration, and team spirit because he did not think they were necessary. His attitude, simply stated, was: “Just follow the process. If it ain’t broke, don’t fix it.” I, being curious in nature and not one to easily take “no” for an answer, found myself in hot water on innumerable occasions. I was a restless, curious individual looking for a “Why?” in most things and more effective ways of doing things. Throughout my 53-year corporate career, I frequently challenged the process, questioned the status quo, and rubbed my bosses on the wrong side, all in a sincere quest to improve productivity and make a positive difference.

Whilst acknowledging the importance of policies, procedures, and processes in maintaining discipline and order in an organisation, I also believe that it must have, parallelly, a deliberately structured platform, vehicle, or mechanism to arouse the curiosity, harness new ideas and ignite the innovation DNA of its leaders and employees. A haven for those individuals who, routinely, question existing norms and push for incremental improvement and innovative solutions. History shows that organisations have benefitted from these challengers.

We often follow policies, procedures, and processes, blindly, without questioning its logic and effectiveness because we are fearful of being branded as ‘destructive disruptors’ and/or ‘timewasters’. Further, we are reluctant to go out of our comfort zones. For these reasons, we adopt a slavish, robot-like acceptance of processes. We conform and avoid being labelled as organisational rabble rousers. Exemplary, and effective leadership is grounded, amongst others, in an insatiable desire to do things differently. Effective leaders are those who identify opportunities, seize the initiatives, and make things happen. Regardless of our position in the organisation hierarchy, whether we are the powerful managing director or the humble cleaner, we have the power to assess the kind of work we do and the systems we typically work within, in challenging ourselves to thinking outside the box. I, as a leader, follower, an individual and/or as a member of a team recollect many instances of above average growth and success because of the adoption of an attitude of questioning the status quo and challenging the process.

The invention of the wheel by the Sumerians in the 4th millennium BC, the work of Savery, Newcomen, Watt, and Stephenson in developing steam driven devices in the 17th and 18th centuries, the work of the Suffragettes in the early 20th century in fighting for the rights of women to vote in the United Kingdom, Dick Fosbury’s adoption of the ‘Fosbury Flop’ in high-jumping at the Mexico Olympics in 1968, Martin Luther King Jr’s and Nelson Mandela’s fight for racial equality in the 20th century, Fred Smith’s envisioning of receiving, distributing, consolidating and shipping on the lines of a hub and spoke in cementing the delivery capabilities of FedEx in 1971, the work of Bill Gates and Paul Allen in advancing microcomputers in the 1970s, the pinch-hitting of Sri Lanka’s Jayasuriya and Kaluwitharana in the power play of 50-over cricket at the World Cup in 1996, the success of Steve Jobs and Steve Wozniak in popularising personal computers in the late 20th century, the rapid growth of Social Media on the back of the vision of Mark Zuckerberg in the first decade of the 21st century and the continuous upgrading of Artificial Intelligence (AI), Datafication and Robotic Process Automation (RPA) et cetera in recent times, are just a miniscule of the examples of ‘billions’ of instances where human advancement was enabled, and driven, by leaders, individuals and teams who dared to question the status quo and challenge the process.

In all these instances, and many others, such challenge resulted in the achievement of extraordinary outcomes via the overcoming of adversity and the enablement of opportunities to grow, innovate, and improve. ‘Challenging the Process’ (the status quo) is one of the Five Practices of Exemplary Leadership identified by Kouzes and Posner in their international bestseller, “The Leadership Challenge.” They describe ‘challenge’ as the crucible of greatness and portray the ‘challenger’ as a pioneer willing to step out into the unknown. They illustrate this further by saying, “Sometimes challenges find leaders, and sometimes leaders find challenges – most often it’s a little of each.”

We live in a world that is increasingly complex and competitive. Today is a scene where technology driven changes happen with a monotonous regularity, operating and economic models evolve continuously, regulations assume strangulating tightness, stakeholder groups become more active, vociferous, and demanding and teams become increasingly cross-cultural and global. In this atmosphere, leaders, individuals, and teams are compelled to work smarter and add value to their stakeholders. Questioning the status quo and challenging the process are paths to the same and, therefore, are no longer options. They are musts for both survival and success.

Despite the obvious plusses of a culture of questioning and challenge, corporates in Sri Lanka are loathe to embracing it. In a recent engagement with a corporate which was concerned about the decline of its leadership position, I was elated by the enthusiasm of the participants, the questioning mood, and the prospects of value-adding changes discussed, at a one-day workshop. The C-Suite leadership was full of ideas and revelled in the adrenalin rush associated with the endless possibilities which were achievable with astute change management. And, based on the discussions which ensued, the employees immediately below the C-Suite were hopeful, and excited, by the acceptance of the top leaders that challenging the current thinking, enabling, and creating growth through new models and increasing productivity through different approaches were more important than merely maintaining the status quo.

However, contrary to the mood of the workshop and the built-up expectations, the top leadership developed cold feet in implementing the radical changes which were essential in making the new strategies work. In the absence of support, and the tone, from the top, the next level employees and their teams were left with the original foundation, a foundation which was not attuned to change and disruption. Different versions of the existing approaches and thinking were employed but sadly they did not carry the penetrative power of evolutionary thinking which was sorely necessary in the subject circumstances. This is a common occurrence. The top management found it so much more comfortable to think inside the existing box than think outside of the box.

A deeper dive into the psychology associated with the questioning of the status quo and challenging of long-established processes shows that it is a mix of context, personalities, and self-interest. The threat to a structure, and a culture, built over several years is a daunting prospect to the senior leaders and original architects who had tasted success over many years via an undisturbed status quo. The likelihood of a focused scrutiny and a more open debate of the subject matter leading to the possible exposure of sub-optimal performances over a long period of time is high and could result in a loss of face and wounded egos, and consequently, a redistribution of power and an upending of the hierarchy. The risks to those challenged are high. And, as the saying goes, there is no animal more dangerous than a wounded buffalo. The risks of such a scenario will not be lost on those individuals wishing to question the status quo and challenge the process.

Just consider the sensitivity of a few ‘questioning’ situations. * The usefulness of a report which has been in existence for several years- particularly a report which was designed and introduced by the current Chief Executive Office, himself, * The appropriateness of the wording in recruitment advertisements where the wording, quoting Tom Peters in his book- “Re-imagine”, is bound to attract the dreadfully dull than the wonderfully weird, * The efficacy of a long established, tried and tested share option scheme in an era where employees are seeking instant gratification, * The objections of the Chief Information Officer to the substitution of brick and mortar real estate by virtual working arrangements, * The re-definition of Key Performance Indicators (KPIs) under a SMART Principles are examples of such areas, areas which have to be handled with care and sensitivity because of the personalities involved.

Admittedly, the status quo has provided comfort and familiarity. That is why it persisted. Change, however, is daunting, and it requires stepping out of comfort zones. The groundbreaking achievements in human history have come from individuals who dared to break free from the confines of comfort. While it takes courage to challenge the familiar, it is such courage which gives birth to paradigm shifts leading to progress and innovation.

Today’s most dynamic and productive work environments are those which have adapted, and fostered, a culture of questioning, challenge, and learning. Environments which encourage a questioning mindset allow for growth, new development, and the continual upgrade of processes, products, and services. However, a conversion to a culture of questioning and challenge can only occur if leaders, followers, and teams feel at ease, safe and secure, to question openly and honestly. Even when this hurdle is cleared, surveys indicate that the skills of asking powerful and insightful questions are in short supply and in the absence of such skills the questions/utterances are often misunderstood.

Mastering the art of asking questions from an inquiring and discussion-point mindset has been found to contribute to a culture of seeking solutions and improving performance. Adversarial, confrontational, and negative questions must be avoided because they, usually, receive justification laden, defensive responses. Questions must be calm, encouraging, and genuine. They must have the ability to turn a problem into a question, a question which inspires our minds to automatically seek the best solution. We are very mindful that not all questions can be answered immediately. Some need reflection and thought before the most inspiring and creative solutions are found.

In this context, it is important that creative thinking is not inhibited by too much logic and tight deadlines. The seeds of ‘ideas’ must be planted lovingly, nurtured patiently, and allowed to grow into a visionary outcome. It was Albert Einstein, the German born theoretical physicist, who said, “It’s not that I’m so smart. But I stay with the questions much longer. The important thing is not to stop questioning.”

An open question which is perceived by the receiver as one which is not designed to elicit a specific preconceived answer, facilitates open discussions. Such openness brings about brainstorming of ideas and collaboration in solution seeking. Powerful questions focus on improvement and continuous learning and development, a learning which is not afraid to challenge or change. From your various experiences, you will know that there is a fine line between someone perceiving an inquiry as helpful or experiencing it as criticism. Your role is not to overrule anyone, but to listen, inspire and encourage the individual and/or the team to share, and discuss, their best thoughts.

The real goal here is to make people feel excited by the opportunity to have influence. Simon Sinek’s golden circle of ‘why,’ ‘what’ and ‘how’ provides another angle to achieving meaningful, lasting success, and gaining the buy-in of all stakeholders. He suggests that a listener first answers the ‘why they do what they do,’ before considering the ‘what’ and ‘how.’ Stated simply the “why” shapes the “what” and the two of them collectively define the “how.” The ‘why’ is the epitome of curiosity, and curiosity is the starting point of questioning and challenge. It is the gateway to unshackling the chains of outdated beliefs and the means to pushing the limits of possibilities.

Successful explorers, innovators, thinkers, and leaders possessed oodles of curiosity in propelling them to challenging the processes, establishing new norms, and exploring new possibilities. Curiosity leads to questioning and challenge. These, in turn, spawn innovation. The pursuit of the unknown is the origin of innovation. It is the point when we start seeing the invisible in our quest to achieve the impossible. It is when we set ourselves free of the limitations, we have set for ourselves based on our knowledge, familiarity, and comfort. Innovation efforts do not guarantee outcomes. It may yield success, or it may end in failure. Venturing into territories, hitherto uncharted, will be daunting and will test the bravest of hearts. This is where the power of curiosity comes into play. It plays its part through questions which dispel fears and illuminate the new knowledge which it acquires with every forward step it takes in exploring the endless possibilities which lie beyond the horizon.

Questioning and challenging are powerful traits born out of curiosity. Whether you are a leader, follower, individual or a member of a team, it is important that you fertilise, nurture, and harness the power of curiosity to drive innovation in your life and work. This you do by, * Staying open minded and open hearted in entertaining new possibilities, * Destigmatising failure. Not every journey into the unknown will yield results. But treating every failure suffered in the process of discovery as a learning, * Asking question of others and allowing others to ask questions from you. Making every effort to respond to the “Why” of your subordinates, peers, superiors, family, friends, and associates, * Feeding your imagination through reading, travel, art, history, and science, * Enhancing your ‘collaboration’ effectiveness by sharing your curiosity and diverse thinking with others and, * Dream and Deliver.

Playwrights Ben Jonson and Shakespeare used the phrase, “Curiosity Killed the Cat” as a proverb in warning of the dangers of unnecessary investigation or experimentation. However, in the competitive fast paced, Curiosity is an essential virtue in kindling the behaviours of Questioning and Challenge.

(The writer is a Leadership Coach, Mentor and Consultant and boasts over 50+ years of experience in very senior positions in the corporate world – local and overseas. www.ronniepeiris.com.)