SJB, Govt. trade barbs over BASL amid judges’ retirement age controversy

Opposition Leader Sajith Premadasa, Industry and Entrepreneurship Development Deputy Minister Chathuranga Abeysinghe

The Main Opposition Samagi Jana Balawegaya (SJB) yesterday rejected allegations by the Government that it offered political inducements, including the post of Chief Minister, to Bar Association of Sri Lanka (BASL) President Rajeev Amarasuriya in exchange for opposing the Government’s proposal to increase the retirement age of Supreme Court judges, as the Government confirmed it intends to pursue a constitutional amendment to implement the reform.

Addressing the opening of an SJB office in Ratnapura, Opposition Leader Sajith Premadasa described the allegation as “the latest lie of the NPP” and denied that the SJB had ever offered political favours.

“The SJB has never given political bribes to anyone. We stand with a straight backbone for an independent judiciary,” he said.

Premadasa accused NPP MPs of using parliamentary privilege to make false allegations, referring to claims that the SJB had promised the Chief Minister’s position in return for opposition to the Government’s proposal to extend the retirement age of Supreme Court judges.

He alleged that the proposal would undermine judicial independence by prolonging the tenure of incumbent judges while existing vacancies in the Superior Courts remained unfilled, delaying the progression of judicial officers through the judicial hierarchy.

Premadasa also said the SJB had consistently defended the independence of the judiciary and had never attempted to exert pressure on judges through parliamentary committees.

Separately, Industry and Entrepreneurship Development Deputy Minister Chathuranga Abeysinghe confirmed that the Government intends to introduce a constitutional amendment to increase the retirement age of judges, noting that changes affecting the judiciary require constitutional reform, while other measures could be introduced at the ministerial level.

Abeysinghe also questioned whether the BASL applies consistent standards, saying he would welcome a statement from the association regarding former Justice Minister Wijeyadasa Rajapakshe or his son.

“We will see whether this is genuine or whether these actions are being taken to protect one particular class,” he said.

Commenting on recent remarks made in Parliament by NPP MP Asitha Niroshana, Abeysinghe said he did not believe the MP had made the allegations merely by relying on parliamentary privilege and suggested further clarification should be sought from the MP.