Sri Dalada Perahera makes Kandy a heaven on earth

The Kandy Esala Pageant is splendid and attractive because it is conducted at night with the participation of about one hundred elephants

As recorded in Maha Parinibbana Sutta, Buddha Himself has sanctioned the worship of His corporal remains. This is one of the most important sanctions the Enlightened One has made in the verge of His passing away.  It is believed that bodily remains of Buddha, Pacceka Buddha and Arahants are worthy of being worshipped. Corporal remains of Buddha are worshipped by Buddhists in addition to Paribhogika Wastu- items used by the Enlightened One and Buddha images. According to Digha Nikaya, the bodily remains of Buddha are enshrined in sthupas and are worshipped. Four canine teeth of the Enlightened One have said to have been separately enshrined and worshipped. One canine tooth is enshrined in Sakra Bawana-the abode of the King of gods. The second and the third canine teeth are enshrined in Gandhara and Nagadeepa respectively. The fourth canine tooth was removed from funeral ashes by a monk and was handed over to the king of Kalinga. The last Indian ruler to possess the sacred tooth relic was King Guhasiva of Kalinga. Meanwhile there are records to the effect that the left canine tooth is in Kandy and the right canine tooth is enshrined in Somawahie Dagaba.

King Guhasiva, who was in war with the neighbouring state, decided to send the sacred tooth relic to Sri Lanka. It was brought to Sri Lanka by king Guhasiva’s daughter princes Hemamala, hidden in her knotted hair. She was accompanied by her husband, prince Danta. This happened during the reign of King Kithsiri Mevan in the fourth century B.C. According to Mahavamsa Sri Dalada Perahera had been conducted in a noble way during the reign of King Parakramabahu the Great and King Pandita Parakramabahu.

According to the information available the modern Esala Perahera of Sri Dalada Maligawa in Kandy dates back to the reign of the Kandyan King Keerthi Sri Rajasinghe. Until this period the sacred tooth relic was regarded as the private property of the King, but on the instructions of the most venerable Weliwita Sri Saranankara Sangharaja, King Rajasinghe decreed that the Sacred Tooth Relic be taken in procession for the masses to see and venerate. The custody of the Relic was handed over to the Maha Sangha. A lay custodian called the Diyawadana Nilame was appointed to handle routine administrative work in the absence of the king.

The Esala perahera in Kandy was originally confined to Hindu devalaya peraheras, but on the advice of Siamese priests, who came for the restoration of Upasampada, King Keerthi Sri Rajasinghe ordered a procession of the Sacred Tooth Relic to lead the peraheras of the four devalayas i.e. Natha, Vishnu, Kataragama and Pattini. The procession embodies all traditional forms of dancing and music. The pageant is splendid and attractive especially because it is conducted at night in the glare of lamps both electric and oil with the participation of about one hundred elephants and various kinds of dancers and drummers. Religious rites and traditions are followed to the letter in the conduct of the Esala perahera in the hill capital.  At the auspicious moment recommended by the astrologer of Sri Dalada Maligawa, known as ‘Nekath Rala’ the Kap erection  ceremony is performed by Natha, Vishnu, Kataragama and Pattini devalayas. This is the first ceremony performed in connection with Esala perahera in which Sri Dalada Maligawa does not participate. “Kap situweema” is to get a pillar or post erected as a vow to gods with a view to performing the proper ceremony at a convenient date. To make the kap or the pole the stem of an Esala (Cassis Fistula) is used. Ruk Attana (Aistomia Scholaris Apoiyn) or the Jak tree (Artocarpus Integrifolia Urti) is cut and Kap is planted in each devalaya. Before cutting the tree frank incense is offered together with a liquid made of Sandalwood dust.

The pole is smoothened to the shape of a small spire and a white cloth is wrapped around it. At the auspicious time the kap is erected in a cubicle called the “Kap Ge”. Three coconuts are placed around the Kap. One coconut is fixed onto the Kap and a coconut oil lamp is kept burning by the side of the Kap.

The most important officer who walks in the perahera throughout the period is the Diyawadana Nilame. He is the lay incumbent and figures prominently in the Esala perahera. He is dressed with extraordinary elegance in the full Kandyan uniform. The highlight of the perahera is the Sri Dalada Maligawa tusker carrying the golden casket containing the Sacred Relics.