Sri Lanka’s new public debt management office getting ready to sell gilts

ECONOMYNEXT – Sri Lanka’s Public Debt Management Office is hiring and training staff with a target to be in operation by December 2025, Director General Udeni Udugahapattuwa said.

For decades Sri Lanka’s government securities have been auctioned by the central bank, which has a separate Public Dept Department for the purpose.

“Our plan is to start the testing period by September this year within the Ministry of Finance, and then we will fully operationalize by the end of this year, by December,” Udugahapattuwa told a forum organized by Sri Lanka’s Association of Primary Dealers.

The central bank will continue to help the PDMO through a transition period until May 2025.

The central bank will also help the PDMO with its software, until the PDMO buys its own software, she said.

The central depository system, will also continue to be with the central bank for the time being.

The PDMO is part of efforts to separate conflicts of interest where the central bank earlier had the responsibility to raise funds for the government at the lowest rate, but to maintain monetary stability, rates may have to be allowed to go up.

Sri Lanka’s central bank had bought maturing debt (debt issued to finance deficits of the past) to target policy and gilt yields further along the yield curve using its debt issuing powers, as well as open market operations.

By suppressing rates with liquidity injections for various reasons including to target a 5 percent rise in cost of living and potential output, Sri Lanka went into a series of rapid-fire currency crises after the end of a civil war which culminated in sovereign default.

Analysts have warned that attempts to suppress rates including through a domestic buffer (the so-called buffer strategy) had contributed to external trouble as private credit picked up since it leads to bank financing of Treasury cash deficits through state bank overdrafts which are re-financed by central bank windows.

Under a ‘single’ policy rate the problem of domestic buffers could worsen, analysts say.  (Colombo/July11/2025)