Ceylon Green Life Plantation enters food supplement market

Guava and agro-cultivators, Ceylon Green Life Plantation Ltd., recently signed up with Ancient Nutra Ltd. to launch a “Deelectaa guava food supplement capsule” for the Sri Lankan market.

Ceylon Green Life Plantation Ltd. Founder and entrepreneur Dr. Marlon Petersay said: “Our core plantation product is guava and we are proud to launch two products into the market as guava fruit punch and a food supplement from guava leaves. It is indeed a historic move for us and we are fortunate to have endorsement from a veteran Ayurvedic doctor like Dr. Sachini Atthanayake. These two products are a first in Sri Lanka and we are hoping to extend the Deelectaa brand to various heights and to lead the market in the future.” Ceylon Green Life Plantation Ltd. CEO Hashan Haputhanthri said: “I like to thank the management of Ancient Nutra for signing off on this project with us where we enter into a new market with our brand – Deelectaa. This is yet another milestone for Ceylon Green Life Plantation where we move into an array of FMCG and supplements to lead the market in two ways.”

Ceylon Green Life Plantation was founded by veteran entrepreneur Dr. Marlon Francis Petersay who established his vision in 2022 to bring pride to Sri Lanka through empowering farming in the most innovative fashion. Spanning across the island, he ventured to consumers to invest on lands that cultivate fruit to serve the purpose that he planned out.

The Ceylon Green Life Plantation FMCG sector further ventured into making the best innovations from the harvest that he acquired. Deelectaa guava tea will be the innovation that all Sri Lankans are waiting for and with its health benefits, it is indeed a sure success that will revolutionise the Sri Lankan tea

In the near future, Deelectaa will enter into almost all sectors of the FMCG category.

Ceylon Green Life Plantation’s vision is to offer the Sri Lankan farmer a better life by fostering values such as integrity and empathy while increasing the income of the people by stimulating productivity through foreign exports.