Sri Lanka opposition leader questions visa fee hike

ECONOMYNEXT — Sri Lanka opposition leader Sajith Premadasa has questioned a decision to increase tourist visa fees, claiming that the nearly 50-percent fee hike could jeopardise the island nation’s booming tourism industry.

“The tourism industry is moving forward gradually. A large number of tourists have started to visit our country. At such a time, visa fees on tourists have suddenly been increased,” Premadasa said speaking at an event.

The increase in the visa fee could bring the improving tourism sector to a standstill, he warned.

Premadasa also claimed that Russia’s Red Wings airline, which had been sending charter flights carrying up to 800 tourists a week, have stopped flying to Sri Lanka citing the visa fee hike as one reason.

“When this decision was made, did the government not do a scientific analysis?” he said.

Earlier this week, Sri Lanka hiked tourist visa fees by at least 50 percent to 75 dollars, shifting to a global processing company, which appears to be charging an additional 18.5 dollars, according to information on the new online portal.

Sri Lanka allowed double electronic travel authorisation for tourists for 50 dollars with more than one entry allowing them to come to the island and also fly to neighboring destinations through a portal operated by the Department of Immigration.

The ETA has drawn plaudits from Trip Advisor and Lonely Planet as a ‘hassle free’ system.

However, tourists from neighboring South Asian countries appear to the hardest hit. Sri Lanka only charged 20 dollars from a SAARC visitor up to the shift to VFS Global. Based on the information disclosed online, SAARC visa fees have risen to 75 dollars with a gazetted fee going up to 35 dollars and 18.5 dollar additional fee charged by VFS Global, the private provider.

Low fees for SAARC citizens have a been Sri Lanka foreign policy strategy of regional integration.

In the ASEAN region, citizens of member countries can travel without any visa and all airports in the region have dedicated immigration counters for them.

Sri Lanka tourist visa fees for SAARC citizens up 167-pct with VFS Global levy?See more