Grassroots participation by researchers vital to understand people’s aspirations – Dr. Vinya Ariyaratne

Dr. Vinya Ariyaratne, President of the Sarvodaya Shramadana Movement, delivered a powerful keynote address on the theme `Building a Sustainable Future through Impactful Research – Role of the Community and Civil Society’.

He highlighted the critical role of grassroots participation and civil society in developing sustainable, community-driven research solutions.

Speaking at the University of Colombo’s Annual Research Symposium, 2024 last week within the University premises, Ariyaratne, whose organization has been at the forefront of community development in Sri Lanka for over six decades, spoke on how authentic community engagement in research can transform communities and provide actionable solutions to pressing issues like climate change, social inequality, and biodiversity loss.

“Community engagement enables researchers to go beyond theory to understand the lived realities, struggles and aspirations of the people at the heart of their work, he stated, stressing that community-driven insights enhance the relevance and long-term impact of research.

He discussed the legacy of the Sarvodaya Shramadana Movement, founded in 1958 by his father, A.T. Ariyaratne, which empowered marginalized communities through “Shramadana,” or the “gift of labor.”

The organization has grown to encompass thousands of village-based initiatives and educational programs, including the Sarvodaya Institute of Higher Learning (SIHL). According to Ariyaratne, the SIHL model promotes “community-led research,” where community members serve as co-researchers, bringing invaluable knowledge to research that shapes projects in areas such as health, education, and environmental conservation.

As he addressed researchers, students, and academics, Dr. Ariyaratne outlined how community-based approaches foster trust, cultural sensitivity, and adaptability. He urged researchers to build mutual respect with communities, noting, “This collaboration enriches research, ensuring it remains relevant and adaptable to the specific contexts in which it will be applied.” Dr. Ariyaratne concluded with a call to action for future researchers: “To create a sustainable future, we must approach research as a journey of shared discovery, learning, and empowerment.”

The University of Colombo’s Annual Research Symposium, attended by prominent academics and development professionals, served as a platform for this message of inclusivity and collaboration. As Sri Lanka and the world face environmental and social challenges, Dr. Ariyaratne’s words resonated as a reminder that the path to sustainability is best paved with community at its center.

Also present Vice Chancellor of University of Colombo, Senior Professor H.D. Karunaratne, Chief Guest Ms. Azusa Kubota , UNDP Resident Representative of Sri Lanka, Prof. Mohan Munasinghe, Founder Chairman of the Munasinghe Institute of Development (MIND), Professor Yasuyuki Todo, Professor, Graduate School of Economics, Waseda University, Japan, Conference Chair and Members of Academic Staff of University of Colombo.

US election outcomes and trade policy changes: What it means for Sri Lanka

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.