Cinnamon Hotels and Resorts CEO Hishan Singhawansa appointed  to JKH Group hotel Boards

Listed John Keells Holdings (JKH) Group hotel companies Trans Asia Hotels PLC and Asian Hotels and Properties PLC which operate Cinnamon Grand and Cinnamon Lakeside have appointed Hishan Singhawansa to their respective Boards as a Non-Independent Non-Executive Director.

Singhawansa is CEO of Cinnamon Hotels and Resorts, leading the brand in “bringing the best of Sri Lanka to the world with style and elegance” across its hotel operations. Cinnamon Hotels and Resorts is part of the Leisure Industry Group of John Keells Holdings PLC (JKH), Sri Lanka’s largest listed conglomerate, which operates over 70 companies across seven diverse industry sectors. In addition to this role, Singhawansa serves as an Executive Vice President at John Keells Group and as a Board Member of John Keells Hotels PLC.

He holds a BSc in Engineering (Hons) from the University of Moratuwa, Sri Lanka, and an MBA from the University of Wales. Singhawansa began his career at John Keells in 2008 as a Management Trainee in the Retail Industry Group, where he went on to head Category Management and Supply Chain before transitioning to the Group’s Leisure sector in 2017. With over 17 years of experience in business and operational efficiencies, he is focused on bringing people and capital together to advance the company’s growth objectives. Under his leadership, Cinnamon Hotels and Resorts is charting a journey defined by authentic hospitality, curated guest experiences, and empowered community development.

He currently leads the brand at a pivotal moment of strategic growth and regional expansion. A key milestone in this trajectory is Cinnamon Life, the Group’s landmark $ 1.2 billion integrated resort development, Sri Lanka’s largest private-sector investment which is set to position Colombo as a premier MICE and leisure destination in South Asia. In addition to his executive responsibilities, Singhawansa also serves on the Board of Directors of the Sri Lanka Convention Bureau and is a Committee Member of The Hotels Association of Sri Lanka (THASL).