Dialog Partners Ria Money Transfer to Simplify Cross-Border Remittance for 20 Million Sri Lankans

(Left to right: Manjula Niroshan (Product Specialist – Mobile money, Dialog Axiata PLC), Sachini de Silva (Chief Business Officer, Dialog Finance), Dr.Emil Ruban (MD & Senior Regional Director – India and South Asia, RIA Money transfer)

Dialog Axiata PLC, Sri Lanka’s #1 connectivity provider and the provider of Sri Lanka’s first and largest mobile money service, eZ Cash, has signed a partnership with Ria Money Transfer (Ria), a global leader in cross-border money transfers and a business segment of Euronet Worldwide, Inc. (NASDAQ: EEFT), to enable individuals abroad to send money directly to eZ Cash wallets in Sri Lanka, benefiting over 20 million Sri Lankans.

Through this collaboration, individuals living or working abroad can now use Ria’s network of approximately 638,000 locations in 199 countries and territories, together with digital connections to 4.1 billion bank accounts and 3.4 billion digital wallet accounts, to send funds directly to a Dialog or Airtel mobile number linked to an eZ Cash wallet. Once received, the funds can be conveniently withdrawn by recipients in Sri Lanka at any of the 55,000+ eZ Cash retail outlets or via Commercial Bank ATMs, using their Dialog or Airtel mobile number and a secure PIN for verification. This innovative service removes the need for traditional banking visits, allowing recipients to access their funds easily and securely via their mobile phones from the comfort of their homes.

This partnership offers a simple, safe, and efficient solution for managing international remittances, making it easier than ever for Sri Lankans to receive money from loved ones abroad. The collaboration reflects both Dialog and Ria’s shared commitment to enhancing financial inclusion and expanding access to essential financial services for all, regardless of location or banking access.

“Remittances are vital to Sri Lanka’s economy, and through our partnership with Ria Foreign Remittance, we are providing an efficient, reliable channel for funds to flow into households and communities. eZ Cash continues to play a pivotal role in supporting financial empowerment and national economic resilience.” Shared Renuka Fernando, Group Chief Digital Services Officer, Dialog Axiata PLC.

“At Ria, we know that every money transfer tells a story of care and connection. By teaming up with Dialog, we are making it easier for Sri Lankans to receive money from abroad quickly right on their mobile phones through eZ Cash”,  shared Emil Ruban Senior Regional Director for South Asia. This partnership underscores our dedication to reliability, both in the service we provide our customers and to the families who rely on remittances to build a brighter future

As remittances remain a cornerstone of Sri Lanka’s economy, this new service plays a vital role in supporting families and communities while strengthening the country’s foreign exchange inflows. By enabling flexible, reliable, and user-friendly remittance solutions, eZ Cash continues to empower Sri Lankans with greater financial mobility and contributes to national economic resilience. As a leader in mobile money innovation, eZ Cash is proud to offer convenient, accessible solutions that meet the evolving needs of its users.