Ratnapura takes centre stage in Sri Lanka’s global gem trade push

Gem City Ratnapura 2026 was inaugurated on August 31, at Grand Silver Ray Hotel, Pelmadulla, bringing together international buyers, foreign delegates, industry leaders and leading Sri Lankan gem and jewellery entrepreneurs, further strengthening Ratnapura’s position as a key international meeting place for the global gem and jewellery trade.

The exhibition, organised for the third consecutive year by the National Gem and Jewellery Authority, in collaboration with the Lanka Gem Dealers and Miners Association, was attended by foreign buyers and representatives from India, Pakistan, Thailand, the USA, Spain, Europe, China, Japan, Poland and Ethiopia.

The participation of international buyers and industry representatives marked another important milestone in Sri Lanka’s efforts to position Ratnapura, the country’s historic City of Gems, as an international hub for the gem and jewellery industry.

Delivering the keynote address, Foreign Affairs, Foreign Employment and Tourism Minister Vijitha Herath emphasised the importance of strengthening international relations and industry-to-industry engagement to establish Sri Lanka as one of the world’s most important and trusted destinations for gems and jewellery.

Herath highlighted the important role of the Foreign Affairs, Foreign Employment and Tourism Ministry and Sri Lankan diplomatic missions overseas in connecting Sri Lanka’s gem and jewellery industry with international markets, investors and business communities.

He stated that Sri Lankan Missions would continue to work closely with the National Gem and Jewellery Authority and industry associations to promote the exceptional quality and unique characteristics of the Sri Lankan Sapphire, in particular, as well as the wide range of coloured gemstones found in Sri Lanka.

Herath also emphasised the importance of identifying international employment and career opportunities for skilled professionals in Sri Lanka’s gem and jewellery sector, while attracting foreign direct investment into value-added areas such as gem cutting and processing, jewellery manufacturing and related industries.

He further highlighted the potential of Sri Lankan gemstones as a significant attraction for international tourists. In addition to the country’s coastline, wildlife, cultural heritage and natural attractions, Sri Lanka’s world-renowned gemstones offer visitors a unique opportunity to experience the origin, mining heritage, cutting, polishing and craftsmanship associated with the industry.

Industry and Entrepreneurship Development Minister Sunil Handunnetti emphasised the government’s vision of transforming Sri Lanka into a global hub for gemstones and jewellery—not only for gemstones produced locally but also for gemstones sourced from other countries.

Handunnetti stated that the government expects the gem and jewellery industry to achieve US $ 2 billion in export revenue, through the export of gemstones, jewellery and other value-added products.

He emphasised that the future competitiveness of the industry must be built upon the availability of fine-quality gemstones, environmental sustainability, greater recognition and empowerment of women in the industry, the elimination of child labour, traceability and increased value addition.