Lakarcade appointed  as National Entity Member  of World Crafts Council AISBL

Lakarcade, Sri Lanka’s leading destination for authentic gifts and souvenirs, proudly announces its official appointment as a National Entity Member of the World Crafts Council AISBL (WCC-International).

This prestigious membership elevation follows a rigourous review conducted by the WCC AISBL Membership Sub-Committee and formal endorsement by the WCC AISBL Board.

The appointment marks a significant milestone for Lakarcade in its continued mission to preserve Sri Lanka’s cultural heritage and promote handmade excellence on the global stage. As a National Entity Member, Lakarcade joins an elite international network of craft practitioners, designers, cultural institutions, and advocates dedicated to advancing traditional and contemporary crafts worldwide.

Lakarcade CEO and Managing Director Anil Koswatte said: “This elevation to National Entity Member status is a landmark achievement for our organisation and for the Sri Lankan craft industry as a whole. It reinforces our commitment to uplifting artisan communities and ensures that the craftsmanship of our rural masters is recognised and celebrated within a global framework. We look forward to actively engaging in the Council’s future initiatives to create a sustainable future for handmade excellence.”

WCC AISBL Secretariat Deputy Secretary General and Treasurer Girija Sudhakaran, officially welcomed Lakarcade to the organisation, noting that the application was approved following a comprehensive evaluation process.

“We greatly appreciate your interest in contributing to the dialogue between material culture, heritage, and contemporary practice — a vision that aligns closely with the mission and values of WCC AISBL,” Sudhakaran stated.

Through this membership, Lakarcade will actively contribute to global craft development initiatives by

participating in international initiatives aimed at safeguarding traditional craft techniques and cultural heritage aiming at preserving traditions. Further, Lakarcade focuses on uplifting artisans through collaborating on programs that empower local artisan communities and promote sustainable livelihoods and increasing global engagement through representing Sri Lanka at international forums while participating in global exhibitions, events, and knowledge-sharing platforms.

This announcement follows Lakarcade’s recent participation at the 2nd Edition of the World Crafts Forum held in Kuwait City from 1 to 3 February, 2026. The forum, themed “Connecting the World, Shaping the Future,” focused on the role of crafts in the creative economy and socio-economic resilience.

Lakarcade remains committed to its vision of “Preserving Heritage” and looks forward to the collaborative opportunities this international partnership will create in showcasing the finest Sri Lankan craftsmanship to the world.