More on Saudi Arabia: ARAMCO and beyond

In earlier years, the main oil company in Dhahran—ARAMCO—was managed entirely by Americans. Even during my time in Saudi Arabia, most of the top executives there were Americans. They lived in a separate, town-like area in ARAMCO. It had stores selling things that were normally restricted in Saudi Arabia, like bacon. Although alcohol was not officially available, many people secretly obtained bottles of liquor or brewed their own at home.

My friend David (da Cunha from Goa) often visited his friends there, mostly on weekends, and drank his fill. A couple of times, he invited me to join him as well. At ARAMCO there were some Catholic women from India whom David befriended. That was how I first tasted a dish called “Paya,” made from the feet of sheep. However, it did not agree with my palate. I have seen some Arabs coming there to eat paya and drink. Later, David started brewing beer at home and offered some to me. It tasted like vinegar, and I refused to drink his beer again. He brewed something similar to vodka as well, and had it with orange juice. He gave me a small bottle of that liquor, which I could not finish in a year.

On one holiday, I planned a trip back to Sri Lanka, while David arranged to return to India. We flew from Dhahran to Bahrain and planned to get our connecting flights from there. But, true to form, Dhahran airport caused long delays, and by the time we landed in Bahrain, my flight to Colombo had departed. David suggested that I fly to Bombay (now Mumbai) with him, stay there overnight, and fly to Colombo on the following day. I agreed.

After we reached Bombay, David suggested that I stay overnight at his relative’s house in Bombay. At the airport, a customs officer informed me that I had to take all my luggage into the city instead of leaving it the airport. He also mentioned that my bags would be thoroughly checked as well. As I was told, the customs officer thoroughly checked my first bag. I told him that I was a transit passenger, and would take all my belongings when I leave the next day.

It was clear to me that he was expecting a bribe, as he said “I am just doing my duty. I don’t expect anything from you.” I told him that I would not bribe him anyway, and asked him to check my other bag as well. He stopped hassling me and let me go. In those days, Bombay was a very crowded city filled with heavy traffic and pollution. Beggars were everywhere, and the roads were in terrible condition. Now it has been transformed into a modern city full of high rise buildings, as I saw in a recent visit.

That night, we stayed at the home of David’s relative. Before going there, despite David’s objection, I bought food and drink to take along for dinner. Next morning I got ready to go to the airport by taxi. In my pocket, I had two brand-new, gold rimmed Parker pens, which I planned to gift to my relatives in Sri Lanka. A young woman in the house asked for my pen to write down an address and I obliged. Later, her sister asked me for the other pen, and I could not refuse. After a while, since I did not get my pens back, I assumed that they had forgotten to return them. So I asked one girl for the pen and she told me that she couldn’t find it. I gave up the hope of getting my pens back, left for the airport, and reached Colombo.

Beside David, I counted two other dear friends during my time in Saudi Arabia: Sumi Sinnatambi and her husband Earl. Earl worked as a researcher at the university. Since they did not own a car, my Mazda 636 came handy. Also, since I was not married then, Sumi suggested that I marry one of her relatives in Sri Lanka. Later she changed her mind because we belonged to different races. Anyway, after Sumi became pregnant and wanted to be in Sri Lanka for her confinement, I accompanied her because Earl could not get leave.

In Saudi Arabia, most laborers were from the Philippines, South Korea, Bangladesh, and Pakistan. Many domestic workers were from Sri Lanka, Pakistan, Bangladesh, and the Philippines. Office workers were mostly from India, Pakistan, and Sri Lanka, while skilled technical jobs were filled by Westerners, as well as educated Asians like Indians and Middle Easterners. However, almost all administrative positions were held by Saudi nationals.

The biggest challenge I faced while working with them was the language barrier. Apart from a few Arabic words like “As-salamu alaykum “ (May God be with You), “Inshallah” (If God so wills), “Bukhra” (Tomorrow), “Shukran” (Thank you), and “Sayyara” (Car), I didn’t know Arabic. Back in the US, I had bought a set of cassette tapes to learn Arabic, but I had yet to start using them. Pakistanis often say Salam for Aslam Walekum Also, Jewish people say “Shalom” as a way of greeting.

One weekend I received a phone call from an Arab professor in our department. He invited me to his home for tea. After I arrived and sat on the cushioned floor with the Arab colleague, his female domestic helper brought a glass teapot filled with reddish tea and some cups. The tea was sweetened well but had no milk. The professor placed a smoking pipe near me and encouraged me to try it. Since I didn’t smoke, I politely refused. It reminded me of an earlier gathering where everyone had food from a large plate that was kept at the center of a circle seated on the floor. While smoking was common in society, I found it unpleasant and unhygienic for people to share the same pipe.

After some time, the professor came to the point, and told me that the domestic worker who lived in his house was Sri Lankan. He said she was troubled and couldn’t understand English or Arabic. He asked if I could speak with her and help resolve her prolems. The woman, a Muslim, spoke Sinhala fluently. The moment I started talking to her, she fell at my feet, begging me to help her return to Sri Lanka. She even asked if I could let her stay at my house until she could leave.

I explained that it was illegal and could cause trouble for all of us. Instead, I advised her to remain patient and wait until her contract ended, after which the employment agency would arrange her to return home. However, she revealed something shocking—she said that the professor was forcing himself on her and that his wife would often beat her with a stick. On hearing this, I promised to help her. Later I warned the professor that if she continued to stay in his house, she would commit suicide, as she told me, which would create serious problems for everyone. Fearing the consequences, the professor sent the woman back to Sri Lanka within a few days.

Living in Saudi Arabia often threw up paradoxes. Even in ancient times, Arabs were famous for their contributions to linguistics. It was in Saudi Arabia that I learned that Algebra was founded by a Persian mathematician named Al-Khwarizmi in the nint century. The background details are given his book  The Compendious Book on Calculation by Completion and Balancing. However, most natives that I met in Saudi Arabia were not literate but were oil rich. Also, Saudi students were not particularly keen on learning perhaps because they came from wealthy families or because the truly talented students had gone abroad for higher studies.

Nevertheless, many Arab students treated me with respect. They often invited me to their homes or took me to large restaurants in the city, where they hosted me lavishly. My Iranian (Persian) graduate students were generally more intelligent and hard working. But they were quite different from Arabic students in many respects.

In my free time in Dhahran, Saudi Arabia, I started writing two technical books. Before leaving CMU I planned to write those books, and signed contracts for them with the reputed publisher, Lexington Books (D. C. Heath), with its head office in Lexington, Massachusetts. Since there were no PCs, laptops, or tablets in those days, the process of preparing a manuscript was as follows. The author would prepare a hand-written manuscript including sketches. A skilled clerk would then type in the manuscript and a professional draftsman would prepare the artwork. The final manuscript would be then sent to the publisher, with whom an agreement had been signed.

Clearly, all these are expensive and time consuming tasks. I approached Dr. Al-Thiga, Dean of Graduate School, to get some support for this project. Since agreements had been signed for the two books with a reputed publisher, the Dean agreed to provide the necessary support. The technical draftsman in the school would prepare the artwork. Mr. Asoka Liyanaarachchi, a Sri Lankan typist in the school would type the manuscript. The financial issue of preparing the two manuscripts was sorted out that way.

The two technical books were, Dynamic Testing and Seismic Qualification Practice, and Automated Transit Guideways: Analysis and Design. The material for the first book came from the consulting work that I did with Westinghouse in Pittsburgh, on the testing of equipment for nuclear power plants that Westinghouse manufactured. The second book concerned Automated Guideway Transit (AGT) systems. Much of the material in this book came from my PhD thesis. It was coauthored by my research supervisor at MIT, Professor David Wormley and me.

In AGT systems, the vehicles move on elevated guideways in existing transportation corridors. The analysis and design of AGT systems was comprehensively presented in this second book. My effort in producing these two technical books became successful, and the books are available in the market even now (see figure below).

At Carnegie Mellon University, my research mostly involved Robotics. As an extension of it, I began to focus on Intelligent Machines and Intelligent Control. For that reason, at Cambridge University on a Senior Fulbright Fellowship, I focused largely on Intelligent Systems, particularly making robots more “intelligent,” and hence on the application of fuzzy logic (an approach to computing based on “degrees of truth” rather than the usual “true or false” (1 or 0) of Boolean logic.)

While in Cambridge, my family and I used to go to Abbotsford in my Lada Riva car. My cousin Dudley Talawila lived in Abbotsford, which is about two hours south of Cambridge. Dudley was a fun-loving character who to our great sadness died young, leaving a wife, two sons and a daughter. They were all very hospitable to us when we visited their home.

Dudley was a Civil Engineer. In one visit to Abbotsford, we were watching a video cassette that Dudley had received from Sri Lanka (this happened in 1987). It contained several programs recorded from a Sri Lankan government TV channel. One of the recordings was on an Avurudu Kumari contest which we particularly enjoyed. Dudley who had not seen the video before said he’d pick the winner and chose the girl who greeted the chief guest and helped him to light the traditional oil lamp. She was indeed the winner but Dudley felt undeservedly.

Dudley expressed his disappointment of the “beauty” of the queen. I had picked a more beautiful girl who I thought would win. Beauty was perhaps not the only criterion for selecting a New Year queen. But, since the contestants were not interviewed and since a breakdown of individual scores was not given, it is justifiable to assume that beauty was the only criterion for winning the contest. My point is deeper than this and is connected to fuzzy logic. Statements like “Damayanthi is beautiful” or for that matter, “Damayanthi is the most beautiful woman among them” are vague and subjective. These are the types of statements which late Professor Lotfi Zadeh of University of California, Berkeley termed “fuzzy declarations.” Incidentally, Professor Zadeh is credited with the development and popularization of fuzzy sets and fuzzy theory.

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.