People’s Bank achieves multiple feats in digital marketing sphere

People’s Bank has again demonstrated its leadership in digital banking and marketing, becoming the first Sri Lankan bank to exceed 100,000 subscribers in both Youtube and Tiktok platforms. Accordingly, the bank received the prestigious YouTube Silver Button recently.

These achievements underscore the bank’s commitment to leverage social media to connect with and educate the public while promoting its financial products and services.

Recognized for its impactful digital content, People’s Bank has used platforms like YouTube, Facebook, Instagram and TikTok to address critical social issues such as women empowerment, gender equality, and preservation of cultural values, with some videos garnering over 2.5 million views.

People’s Bank has already stamped its leadership in digital marketing arena in Sri Lanka by surpassing 3 million customer registrations on its digital platforms.

Prof. Narada Fernando, Chairman of People’s Bank, remarked, “This achievement underscores our commitment to challenging the outdated perception that state-owned entities cannot excel in innovation and technology. People’s Bank is leading by example, setting new benchmarks in digital banking and marketing, and proving that public sector organizations can deliver world-class solutions.”

Clive Fonseka, CEO/GM of People’s Bank, added, “Our success in digital banking and marketing is a direct result of our relentless focus on leveraging the cutting-edge technology to communicate with and deliver value to our customers. We take pride in offering innovative, paperless solutions like the People’s Wiz digital account opening system and facilitating seamless digital payments for businesses. By integrating advanced technology and fostering a customer-centric approach, People’s Bank has proven that innovation is not confined to the private sector. With its vision for a digitally empowered Sri Lanka, People’s Bank is setting the stage for the future of banking in the country”

Bank stocks spur following expectations on positive credit profile of the sector

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.