Working with Minister Richard Pathirana and President Chandrika Kumaratunga

I have already recounted many aspects and attributes of the Minister’s character, outlook and mode of functioning. The most important aspects were that he was hardworking, practical and results oriented. He had a temper which flared up from time to time, but never at the expense of myself and one or two other senior officials. This factor was both a positive and negative one. Positive because officials feared to postpone or delay matters. Negative because it tended to demoralize some good officers.

The sudden shift of officers, from one responsibility to another which occurred at times, because the Minister had listened to some story and had acted without a balanced consideration of all sides, made it difficult sometimes to establish and bond a team. This did up to a point slow down implementation and took up my time in conflict resolution. At times there was an element of comedy in his temper trantrums.

One day I went into his room to find him in a very angry mood. On seeing me, he rather abruptly asked me to sit and turning to his peon, commanded in his stentorian voice, “Ask that donkey to come and see me.” The peon took off with great speed and by now I was very curious to find out who this “donkey” was who seemed to be well known to the Minister and his peon. A short while later the peon appeared bringing the Minister’s private secretary along with him!

In fairness to the private secretary it was not uncommon for the Minister to use such interesting terms. On one occasion one of my additional secretaries told me that the previous day, an angry Minister berated him for something and ended the conversation by calling him “Nariya”. A simple translation of this Sinhala word to the tepid “Fox” in English cannot in any way capture the force and venom of the Sinhala term when it is hurled at you as an epithet.

All this however is not to deny the Minister’s great strengths in handling one of the largest and most complex Ministries of government with responsibility for a budget of nearly 10 billion rupees. Having come up through the system as teacher and principal, nobody could deceive him on the details of school and education administration, and he dealt with the numerous and sometimes difficult trade unions with decisiveness and authority. They all feared him up to a point. He was an

Before I leave him however, I must make two final comments. The first relates to his hospitable nature which many are unaware of. The Minister lived in an official residence off Baudhaloka Mawatha close to the Post Graduate Institute of Archaeology. This is about 10-15 minutes drive from the Ministry.

I had discovered that when the Minister came to the Ministry, there were so many demands on him from numerous parties that invariably he was in a bad temper. This was no environment in

which serious reflective work could be done or decisions taken after calm deliberation.

Therefore, when important matters piled up somewhat I used to suggest to him to give me and some of my officials about three hours of his time at home. He always agreed, and whenever we took hundreds of papers and saw him at home he appeared to be a different person. He was more relaxed and focused and we found that we got through a large amount of work quite expeditiously. At home, the Minister often did not serve us with an ordinary cup of tea. On many days he served us with Nestomalt or Horlicks. Evidently he wanted hard working officials to receive proper nourishment. This was not all.

From time to time he used to get up and go out for a few minutes. It was only around 12.30 p.m. when we had done about three hours of solid work and almost completed what we had come for did we discover the reason for his periodic absence. He would say “Now it is lunch time, you must have lunch and go.” All of us used to thank him and politely decline, because some of us were used to a late lunch, whilst others had brought their lunch. But in the true style of Sri Lankan hospitality the Minister would insist that we have lunch saying that in any case the lunch has been cooked and there was nobody else to eat it.

When we sat down to lunch we discovered that he seemed to have ordered that everything in the house that was capable of being cooked was on the table. There were 10 to 12 curries. After lunch, dessert was obviously another excuse to empty the house. There were another 10-12 choices including invariably curd and treacle, sweetmeats and fruit. We were deeply touched. This was not the extension of a routine courtesy. This came from the heart. He took joy in giving us everything that was available. He was a man of few words, but this was manifestly a powerful statement of appreciation of the work we were doing.

The second comment relates to his capacity to manifest personal goodwill. My son was getting married in September 1997 and I handed the Minister an invitation to the wedding, although I was aware that he was due to go to China during this period. As he took the invitation, he said, “I am very sorry Mr. Pieris, but I may not be in the country during this time.” I said that I was aware of this, but that I thought it important to invite him.

A few days before the wedding, and before his departure, he said that he would like to come home and personally wish our son. I said that given his very busy schedule, – he was also Chief Government Whip – and preparations for the journey, we would fully understand if he didn’t come, and said he could always meet my son later. But this did not appeal to his sense of social obligation.

I was also aware that he liked and respected me. Many a time, when he wanted to discuss something with me, he did not send for me. He walked across to my room and sat in one of the chairs placed in front of my table. On such occasions, I tried to get up from my seat and join him in the adjoining chair rather than sitting at my table, because of my own respect for him, not always successfully, because of his insistence that I do not leave my seat. There were also occasions where he had just simply told me, “Mr. Pieris, I have great respect for you.”

All this would have played a part in his sincere desire to visit our home. I however, placed one condition pertaining to the visit, which was fixed for late evening. I told the Minister, that just as much as he had on several occasions not permitted us to leave his home without having lunch, that I could not permit him to leave our home without having dinner with us. He laughed and agreed. On the appointed day, he came personally carrying a present for my son. We spent a quiet evening together conversing, and later having dinner. I was glad to see that he was very relaxed in the environment of our home. Such moments must be very rare for an extremely hard working and duty conscious Minister of great personal integrity.

Finally, and before closing this chapter, I must refer to my working relations with President Kumaratunga. As this book reveals, I had worked closely with her mother, Prime Minister Sirimavo Bandaranaike. I had worked directly with her brother Anura when I was Secretary to the Ministry of Higher Education. I had worked with her elder sister Sunethra, when for a period she was her mother’s Co-ordinating Secretary handling trade union and political affairs, when I functioned as Secretary to the Prime Minister in the 1970’s.

Out of all of them, President Kumaratunga was one whom I knew least closely, because much of the time I was working with her mother, she was abroad pursuing her studies. Even thereafter there was no occasion when we actually worked together. But after I was appointed as Secretary to the Ministry of Education and Higher Education in her 1994 government, I had the opportunity of establishing an official working relationship. We met at various meetings and discussions. Occasionally she phoned to check on something or obtain some information, and a few times we met socially at an official dinner. Therefore, having worked with the members of her family, I found her way of functioning to a signiicant extent different, and at times even unorthodox.

The first quality I noticed in her was her generally relaxed nature. I do not know, whether inside her, she was as relaxed as she appeared to be. But I have never seen her in a hurry. Even when she telephoned, she always had the time to inquire how you were getting on and to exchange pleasantries. Therefore, one felt at ease with her. She had the capacity, with a smile and a quip to put people at ease. She had a developed sense of humour which helped. Perhaps, it was this relaxed nature of hers that led to her getting so late to keep her appointments.

It was true that when she had an outside appointment, security considerations often dictated an unscheduled change of time. But more than this it was her chatty and friendly nature, as well as the inevitable over-programming that takes place in the case of a head of state or government that invariably led to a long back up of appointments. She evidently also did not have a strong diary Secretary.

Three other things I noticed about her were a formidable memory, great self confidence and a punishing capacity for work. On one occasion at a Secretaries’ meeting with a large agenda, she sat for over six hours without getting up from her chair, finally ending up at 11.30 in the night and emerged looking quite fresh! We at least got up and went to the washroom. Perhaps she needs to look at greater delegation to officials carefully selected for their undisputed competence. But one got the feeling that she was not too comfortable with extensive delegation. She appeared happier dealing with matters herself.

But then this brings about many other problems including the dangers of micro management. Mrs. Kumaratunga was also quick to spot an excuse and had a knack for sorting out excuses from reasons. On one occasion she telephoned me in the Ministry and after the relaxed question “So how are you?” she proceeded to tell me that she had told the Minister to do certain things, and ended up saying “I am sure he must have forgotten.”

This was of course said to a civil servant, who according to the code of civil servants everywhere, had nearly spent a lifetime defending their Ministers. I therefore instinctively and naturally told her what might have happened, constructing a plausible path for the Minister to escape in case he indeed had forgotten. The President was quick to spot this. With a mixture of sternness and affability she said “now you are trying to make excuses for your Minister.” She was right.

The final observation I have to make from my limited experience of working with her is to refer to her unorthodoxy. She Was quite natural in her actions and not overtly fond of protocol or too many ceremonial trappings. She had a tendency to think “out of the box,” and not necessarily in well established settled categories. I happened to mention this to a team from abroad who were needlessly nit picking on some matters connected with some aid they had granted us.

I told them that we have had a generational change in the Presidency, and that in my view we had now someone who would not hesitate to dictate and send a letter directly to the head of their institution if she was aggrieved enough, and that settled practice or protocol would not stop her if she made up her mind. I also told them that I did not know what her threshold of patience was. All nit picking and the splitting of hairs stopped promptly. Our discussion thereafter proceeded smoothly and expeditiously.

In conclusion, my experience was that although she tended to be different and sometimes’ unpredictable, she never resented a contrary view being expressed. There were many officials who in my view were unnecessarily cautious and diffident in expressing their frank views. My experience was that she welcomed a well argued contrary view. Like all persons who had reached those heights, she tended at times to be stubborn, and close her mind. To me this was perfectly normal. All leaders do this, and in a final chapter I intend to provide evidence from international experience in such matters.

What 1 have recorded is my personal experience of infrequently working officially with the President as a public servant. They have been pleasant experiences where at meetings there was ample scope for good humour and an anecdote or two. On one occasion when I was briefing her on an important matter I had decided to speak of the positives first and then get on to the negatives. She interrupted me half way and said, “You are only telling me all the good things but I am aware that there are many short comings.”

I immediately told her “Madam I am now on physiology, I will come to pathology later,” a turn of phrase perhaps due to the bad influence of serving on the Board of the Post Graduate Institute of medicine! She laughed and said “Alright, alright carry on.”

(Excerpted from In Pursuit of Governance, autobiography of MDD Pieris)

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.