Big scene for JAYASRI TWINS… Reggae festival in Colombo

JAYASRI Twins, Rohitha and Rohan, continue to create great vibes in the scene in Europe, and they are doing it big time!

Rohitha and Rohan were in Sri Lanka, as well, and went back to Austria, where they are based, at the end of May, 2025, for their summer commitments in Europe.

They teamed up with the MEMBERS band to commence their tour of Europe, with performances in Vienna (Austria), Bucharest (Romania), and Milano and Naples, in Italy, with several open air and indoor concerts.

“It was awesome to see the Sri Lankan crowd enjoying our music and we had a superb time entertaining them,” says Rohitha.

They also did a gig in the UK, for the Sri Lankan community in that part of the world, which also turned out to be mind-blowing.

Says Rohitha: “We did our thing at the Festival of Cricket (FOC) event in London, and it was their 35th Anniversary, as well.

“The atmosphere was terrific and we did a great show with the EXCEED band from London.

“We were told that this was the first time such an event drew such a large crowd of Sri Lankans living in the UK.”

According to Rohitha, old boys teams of 33 schools participated in this Festival of Cricket and the crowd came from all over the UK to be a part of the action.

The following day, after the event, Rohitha and Rohan were felicitated by the Maris Stella College Old Boys Association UK, where, says Rohitha, they had a great time with old friends and families of MSC.

The next few months is going to be a busy period for Rohitha and Rohan, with some summer shows in Austria and Switzerland; September to Dubai, followed by Australia and New Zealand, with the band DADDY, and then in October to South Korea and Japan.

And the good news we have for local fans of Rohitha and Rohan and JAYASRI is that on 28th November, this year, the long-awaited legendary festival ROCK MEETS REGGAE is scheduled to take place right here, in Colombo, after a six-year break.

The venue will be the Viharamahadevi Open Air Theatre and will also feature Sri Lanka’s rock star, Chitral Somapala, along with the band Black Majesty from Australia, and, of course, the internationally acclaimed JAYASRI band from Austria.

Says Rohitha: “Chitral Somapala with Black Majesty and the JAYASRI full band, all the way from Austria, will be doing it live, giving the best vibes from the Rock ‘n’ Reggae genres.

“We all are really happy to announce this and more news will follow soon in Ivan’s awesome music page.”

Fans of JAYASRI can follow their social media and websites for more news:

The large crowd that turned up at Festival of Cricket in London

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.