DIMO lights up SSC for international day -night cricket

DIMO has successfully completed the design, supply, installation, and commissioning of a state-of-the-art floodlighting system at the Singhalese Sports Club (SSC), positioning it as Colombo’s second and the country’s fifth cricket venue capable of hosting international day–night matches. The SSC is also one of the three venues selected to host matches during the ICC Men’s T20 World Cup this year.

This milestone also reflects the enduring partnership between Sri Lanka Cricket and DIMO, that began in the 1980s when DIMO pioneered Sri Lanka’s first stadium floodlighting system. Since then, DIMO has delivered floodlighting solutions for four international cricket stadiums, including the SSC, establishing itself as the country’s leading provider in this space and contributing to four out of the five stadium floodlighting systems in the country.

Designed to meet the demanding technical and broadcast standards of modern international cricket, the new floodlighting system significantly enhances on-field visibility, broadcast quality, and the overall spectator experience. The system features advanced LED luminaires operating at a correlated colour temperature of 5,700 Kelvin and a colour rendering index of 90, closely replicating natural daylight to ensure sharp visual clarity and accurate colour reproduction. This enables players and match officials to perform with greater confidence under night-time conditions.

The lighting system fully supports high-definition television coverage, including 4K and 8K broadcasts, ensuring that live action, slow-motion replays, and Decision Review System (DRS) reviews appear clear, sharp, and consistent on screen. The flicker-free design eliminates visual distortion during high-speed camera shots.

Bitget hits $18B in tokenised stock trading as institutions drive growth

MullenLowe Sri Lanka appoints Harendra Uyanage as Chief Creative Officer

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.