Unilever Sri Lanka and Ministry of Agriculture & Plantation Industries sign MOU on sustainable tea production

Ministry of Agriculture and Plantation Industries and Unilever Sri Lanka recently entered into a Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) to develop the country’s first national and globally accepted standard for sustainable tea production. This first-of-its-kind initiative signifies a shared commitment to propel the Sri Lankan tea industry towards a more sustainable and ethical future.

The MoU signing ceremony was graced by Honourable Mahinda Amaraweera, Minister of Agriculture and Plantation Industries, Mr. B. L. A. J. Dharmakeerthi, Secretary, the Ministry of Agriculture and Plantation Industries, Chairman & Representatives of Sri Lanka Tea Board and other tea industry dignitaries.

Unilever Sri Lanka’s ‘Ceytea’ factory is the largest supplier of black tea extract to the Global Pepsi-Lipton JV and its world-famous Iced Tea brands ‘Lipton’ and ‘Brisk’. The manufacturing site in ‘Agarapathana’ has been at the center stage of innovation and sustainability in value-added tea.

Damith Abeyratne, Supply Chain Director at Unilever Sri Lanka said, “Unilever Ceytea factory in Agarapathana is the largest supplier of black tea extract to the Global Pepsi-Lipton JV. This collaboration with the Ministry of Agriculture and Plantation Industries is a significant step forward in our efforts to drive sustainable sourcing of agricultural raw materials under the Unilever Climate Action Transition Plan. The initiative positively benefits ‘Ceylon Tea’ because today’s global demand is for sustainably farmed agricultural produce.”

Further commenting on this partnership, B.L.A.J. Dharmakeerthi, Secretary at the Ministry of Agriculture and Plantation Industries, stated, “The Ministry of Agriculture and Plantation Industries is delighted to join forces with Unilever Sri Lanka in this public-private partnership. This MoU represents a crucial step towards strengthening the Ceylon Tea industry’s global competitiveness. By implementing these comprehensive measures, we aim to solidify Sri Lanka’s reputation as a global leader in ethical and sustainable tea production.”

Sri Lanka is among the top five tea exporters globally. This Standard will address three key areas: minimizing environmental impact through regenerative and deforestation-free agriculture, ensuring fair and respectful treatment for all tea industry workers through ethical workplace practices, and guaranteeing the safety and quality of Sri Lankan tea through rigorous testing and monitoring procedures

CIPM Gold Medals and scholarships for top performers at Horizon and SLIIT

CSE in initial surge as Browns Investments buys some overseas Lipton Plantations

Unilever Sri Lanka, the Central Environmental Authority and the Marine Environment Protection Authority enter into a partnership for a sustainable future

Unilever Sri Lanka celebrates a Decade of Empowering Sri Lanka’s Youth

‘Unilever Around Sri Lanka in 60 Days’, an initiative launched to upskill and empower youth across universities in Sri Lanka

Expanding horizons; Unilever’s uStore.lk enters into a partnership with Celeste Daily and Uber Eats to improve consumer convenience

Unilever’s Lever Ayush takes centre stage as a main partner of the inaugural Wedaduru Abhiman Presidential Ayurveda Awards ceremony

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.