Sri Lanka and Indonesia conclude inaugural political consultations opening new chapter of bilateral ties

Year-round activities planned in 2027 to mark 75th anniversary of diplomatic relations

Sri Lanka reiterates request for support of Indonesian side for bid to obtain ASEAN Sectoral Dialogue Partnership status and to accede to Regional Comprehensive Economic Partnership

The inaugural round of Political Consultations between the Ministries of Foreign Affairs of Sri Lanka and the Republic of Indonesia was held on 22 September 2026 in Colombo, marking a significant milestone in the longstanding and friendly relations between the two countries.

The Consultations commenced with the signing of a Memorandum of Understanding (MoU), establishing a formal framework for regular bilateral dialogue and enhanced cooperation between the two Ministries. The MoU reaffirms commitment of both sides to elevate engagement and strengthen institutional ties in key areas of shared interest.

The Sri Lankan delegation was led by Foreign Affairs, Foreign Employment and Tourism Ministry Secretary Aruni Ranaraja, while the Indonesian delegation was headed by Deputy Minister for Asia-Pacific and African Affairs of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Indonesia, Dr. Santo Darmosumarto.

Foreign Secretary Ranaraja, in her opening remarks highlighted the enduring partnership between the two countries, recalling the foundational role both nations played in advancing major diplomatic initiatives most notably Non-Aligned Movement. Deputy Minister for Asia-Pacific and African Affairs Dr. Darmosumarto, in his response, welcomed the signing of the MoU as a structured framework for regular engagement and deepen cooperation between the two countries, while highlighting opportunities to expand collaboration across mutually beneficial areas.

During the deliberations, the two sides agreed to work towards advancing economic ties including in expanding trade and investment particularly in the pharmaceutical, mineral and textile sectors and promoting stronger connectivity between the business communities of the two countries. Key areas of discussion included promoting regular high-level interactions; expanding cooperation between the legislatures; defence and maritime security cooperation; intelligence sharing to combat emerging transnational threats; agriculture cooperation including in the supply of fertiliser, as well as fisheries cooperation.

Both sides also recognised the significant potential to deepen tourism cooperation and ease visa processes, fostering seamless travel and enhancing connectivity and identified strengthening educational and cultural cooperation for stronger people-to-people exchanges.

The Sri Lanka side reiterated the request for support of the Indonesian side for its bid to obtain ASEAN Sectoral Dialogue Partnership (SDP) status and to accede to the Regional Comprehensive Economic Partnership (RCEP), which was duly acknowledged.

The two delegations agreed to organise a series of year-round activities to commemorate the 75th anniversary of diplomatic relations between Sri Lanka and Indonesia in 2027, emphasising that this historic milestone serves as a pivotal moment to celebrate shared achievements and explore new avenues to deepen bilateral ties.

The Consultations concluded with the decision to hold the 2nd Round of Consultations in Jakarta in 2028, reaffirming the shared commitment to maintaining regular dialogue and advancing bilateral cooperation.

The Sri Lanka Delegation included Sri Lanka Ambassador to Indonesia and ASEAN, Sashikala Premawardhane, Additional Secretary - Political

Affairs M.R.K. Lenagala, Director General - South East Asia and Central Asia Chamari Rodrigo and senior Officials of the line agencies.