US backs economically sustainable future after Sri Lanka man-made crisis: Foreign Relations Chair

ECONOMYNEXT – The United States supported the people of Sri Lanka in their pursuit of “an inclusive, just, democratic, and economically sustainable future”, Chair of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee Ben Cardin has said.

President Anura Kumara Dissanayake head of the National People’s Power coalition backed by the Janatha Vimukthi Peramuna came to power after a most severe currency collapse triggered by the central bank in its history, after printing money to target ‘potential output’, despite the lack of a clean float.

“Millions of Sri Lankans peacefully exercised their democratic right in this weekend’s presidential election, demonstrating a deep and meaningful commitment to shaping their country’s path forward,” Cardin said in a statement.

“As President-elect Anura Kumara Dissanayake takes office, his administration faces the urgent task of addressing the devastating, man-made 2022 economic crisis and advancing genuine progress in governance, anti-corruption, human rights, and accountability for past injustices.

“The United States remains committed to supporting the people of Sri Lanka in their pursuit of an inclusive, just, democratic, and economically sustainable future.”

The US through its Treasury initiated International Monetary Fund is complicit in Sri Lanka’s currency crises and the economic controls since 1950 that had made it a backward nation in Asia, critics have pointed out.

What happened in Sri Lanka in 2022 (and in other crises since 1950) is the same as what happened in the US in 1971, after 10 years of ‘macro-economic policy’ in the belief that there was a trade-off between inflation and employment.

The last of Sri Lanka’s ‘Nixon’s shock’ style import controls are to be removed in early in 2025.

The similarities are so bizarre and goes as far as counterparty central bank swaps invented by the Fed in the 1960s being used to suppress rates in several of the peacetime crises.

The IMF itself gave technical assistance to target potential output after the end of a civil war, giving a statistical framework to print money for growth.

On the eve of the election which brought President Dissanayake to office, the IMF issued a technical assistance report for the central bank to start a ‘single policy rate’, despite the devastation wrought by average weighted call money rate targeting in a country without a war. (Colombo/Aug24/2024)