Crescent recognised for purpose-driven storytelling at 31st Sumathi Awards

From left: Lakmal Jayasekara - General Manager - Sales & Marketing, Norfolk Foods (Pvt.) Ltd.; Samurdhi Ranasinghe - Film Director; Kaushi Siriwardena – CEO, Watermark Adverts (Pvt.) Ltd.; Ameena Ziauddin - President/MD, Norfolk Foods (Pvt.) Ltd.; Milani Dias - Brand Manager, Norfolk Foods (Pvt.) Ltd.; and Esha Ushneesha Jayasinghe- Creative Officer/ Production Designer, Watermark Adverts (Pvt.) Ltd

Crescent, the flagship retail brand of Norfolk Foods (Pvt) Ltd., has been recognised with the 2nd Runner-up award for Best Television Commercial at the 31st Sumathi Awards 2026.

The recognition, presented recently at the awards ceremony held at Monarch Imperial, marks an important milestone in Crescent’s journey of creating campaigns that connect with consumers through authentic and relatable storytelling.

Featuring a departure from conventional representations of men in the household, the commercial tells the story of a husband who celebrates his wedding anniversary by lovingly preparing a meal for his wife and child. Through this simple yet powerful narrative, the campaign encourages a more inclusive perspective on family roles while demonstrating how expressions of love are best reflected in everyday acts of care.

Developed in partnership with Watermark Adverts, the award also recognises the creative collaboration between Crescent and Watermark Adverts in bringing a campaign to life that reflects evolving family dynamics in Sri Lanka while celebrating love, family, and shared responsibility. By placing a husband and father at the centre of the kitchen, the commercial uses Crescent’s distinctive range of effortless and straightforward meals to challenge long-held perceptions while reinforcing the importance of partnership, equality, and mutual appreciation in the home.

Commenting on the achievement, Ameena Ziauddin - President/MD, Norfolk Foods (Pvt) Ltd., added, “This award is more than recognition of a television commercial; it celebrates a story that reflects our values as a brand. We are grateful to our creative partners, our team, and most importantly, our consumers for embracing the message with such warmth. We believe the strongest stories are those that inspire meaningful conversations while remaining rooted in everyday life. Moreover, this recognition encourages us to continue creating a genuine connection with Sri Lankan families.”

Sumathi Awards’ recognition reinforces Crescent’s commitment to telling stories with lasting social relevance. The accolade underscores the brand’s dedication to creating campaigns that resonate with audiences while inspiringfar-reaching impactfor the betterment of society.