Festive surprise from singer Suzi…

Suzi Croner, of the popular Sri Lankan outfit of the ’90s, Friends, surprised everyone in the scene here by turning up, unexpectedly…and performing, as well.

According to Suzi, she had no plans to checkout Colombo during the festive season. However, she was literally forced to come due to family commitments. And, when people that matter got to know about her impending arrival, they went into action to give local music lovers the opportunity to see Suzi live in action…after almost 26 years.

Suzi entertained the large crowd that turned up at the CR & FC for the club’s festive celebrations and she certainly did keep everyone entertained with her vocals and stage presentation.

The singer was also featured at the opening of the new Cheers Pub at the Cinnamon Grand, along with Manilal Perera, and continued her act for a few nights more.

Those who missed seeing this bubbly personality in action will now have to wait patiently till next month, February, when she will be back, in Colombo, to entertain her friends, fans and music lovers.

“I will be performing at the concert ‘Country Night,’ scheduled for 21st February, and will be checking out the Cheers Pub again, on 13th and 14th February”

Suzi, who now resides in Switzerland and operates as Suzi Flückiger, is quite popular in the city of Zurich and has to keep music lovers, in that part of the world, entertained, almost on a daily basis.

No sooner she hit the Zurich scene, after arriving from Sri Lanka, she had to entertain at a karaoke party.

Says Suzi: “Such a lovely crowd and they all danced the night away till 3.30 am. I guess I’ll have to sing ‘she works hard for the money’ and, guess what? The organisers have booked me again for 2025.”

Suzi will also be travelling to Australia, in October this year, for her annual ‘Country Night’ concert.

Friends, the band Suzi performed with, were extremely popular, not only in the local scene, but abroad, as well, and did regular gigs in Europe.

In Sri Lanka, they had a huge following, and a fan club with over 1,000 members, with Jennifer Rodrigo as its President.

Although not involved in the entertainment scene now, Jennifer Rodrigo was there, in a big way, to welcome Suzi when she turned up to perform at the CR & FC festive get-together.

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.