Zohran Mamdani sworn in as New York City Mayor, creating history

Mamdani, the US city’s first Muslim Mayor, is also youngest person to be inaugurated in generations

Zohran Mamdani has been sworn in as Mayor of New York City, becoming the first Muslim and the youngest person in generations to take the oath of office in the US’ biggest city.

Mamdani, a Democrat, was sworn in at a historic, decommissioned subway station in Manhattan just after midnight yesterday, placing his hand on a Quran as he took his oath. “This is truly the honour and the privilege of a lifetime,” Mamdani said.

The ceremony, administered by New York Attorney General Letitia James, a political ally, took place at the old City Hall station, one of the city’s original subway stops known for its stunning arched ceilings.

He will be sworn in again, in grander style, at a public ceremony at City Hall at 1 p.m. (18:00 GMT) by US Senator Bernie Sanders, one of the Mayor’s political heroes. That will be followed by what the new administration is billing as a public block party on a stretch of Broadway known as the “Canyon of Heroes,” famous for its ticker-tape parades.

Mamdani now begins one of the most unrelenting jobs in US politics as one of the country’s most-watched politicians.

In addition to being the city’s first Muslim Mayor, Mamdani is also its first of South Asian descent and the first to be born in Africa. At 34, Mamdani is the city’s youngest Mayor in generations.

In a campaign that helped make “affordability” a buzzword across the political spectrum, the democratic socialist promised to bring transformative change with policies intended to lower the cost of living in one of the world’s most expensive cities. His platform included free childcare, free buses, a rent freeze for approximately 1 million households, and a pilot program of city-run grocery stores.

But he will also have to face other responsibilities: Handling rubbish, snow and rats, while getting blamed for subway delays and potholes.

Mamdani will also have to deal with US Republican President Donald Trump.

During the mayoral race, Trump threatened to withhold federal funding from the city if Mamdani won, mused about sending National Guard troops to New York City, and suggested that Mamdani should be deported. He also called Mamdani a “100% Communist Lunatic” in a social media post.

But Trump surprised supporters and foes alike by inviting the Democrat to the White House for what ended up being a cordial meeting in November.

“I want him to do a great job and will help him do a great job,” Trump said in the meeting, and the US President even came to Mamdani’s rescue as the two addressed reporters.

Mamdani was born in Kampala, Uganda, the son of filmmaker Mira Nair and Mahmood Mamdani, an academic and author. His family moved to New York City when he was 7, with Mamdani growing up in a post-9/11 city where Muslims did not always feel welcome. He became a US citizen in 2018.