CSE-SEC launch ‘A Share for Everyone, A Unit for Everyone’ initiative

Monaragala Investor Forum panel discussion members from left: Softlogic Asset Management Manager Business Development Kumudu Kekirideniya, HNB Stockbrokers Director Sales Kapila Pathirage, CSE Executive Vice President Marketing Niroshan Wijesundere and SEC Manager External Relations Nimal Kumarasinghe

The Colombo Stock Exchange (CSE), together with the Securities and Exchange Commission of Sri Lanka (SEC) launched its ‘A Share for Everyone, A Unit for Everyone’ initiative at the investor forums in Monaragala and Batticaloa recently as part of an ongoing islandwide initiative to broaden investor participation.

The forums were held in Monaragala at Silanrich Hotel and in Batticaloa at FG Golden River Hotel. The forums attracted over 500 participants across both locations.

The ‘A Share for Everyone, A Unit for Everyone’ concept, developed by SEC Chairman Sen. Prof. D.B.P.H. Dissabandara, aims to promote a shared commitment to creating wealth and value within a fair, efficient, orderly and transparent capital market by ensuring broad and accessible participation for all.

The investor forums opened with presentations by senior economists from the Central Bank, including N.B. Janagan and Kasunka Herath, who provided a high-level overview of the country’s macroeconomic landscape.

First Capital Holdings Vice President Corporate Finance and Advisory Atchuthan Srirangan and HNB Stockbrokers Director Sales Kapila Pathirage offered the participants an overview of the capital market and its investment opportunities.

Softlogic Asset Management Manager Business Development Kumudu Kekirideniya and Softlogic Asset Management Business Development Officer Mohamed Ashfer introduced participants to the fundamentals of unit trust investing.

The panel discussion featured CSE Executive Vice President Niroshan Wijesundere as well as SEC External Relations Senior Manager Sheena Goonaratna and SEC Manager External Relations Nimal Kumarasinghe.

Batticaloa Investor Forum panel discussion members from left: First Capital Holdings Vice President Corporate Finance and Advisory Atchuthan Srirangan, SEC Senior Manager External Relations Sheena Goonaratna, CSE Branch Manager Kandy Dhananjaya Abeysiriwardana and Softlogic Asset Management Business Development Officer Mohamed Ashfer