Zellers reintroduces chocolates with new flavours

The return of Zellers Chocolates aims to reshape Sri Lanka’s premium chocolate market while reviving cherished memories from the past. Zellers stands as a pioneer in local craftsmanship and innovation, as fine chocolates have become a beloved indulgence and synonymous with amazing moments. Now, the brand aims to bring Sri Lankans world-class chocolates with a local twist, paying homage to the fond memories of time-honoured generations, while helping a whole new generation create their own.

As Sri Lanka’s first homegrown chocolate manufacturer, founded in 1964 by A.G. Hinniappuhami – the visionary Founding Chairman of Maliban – Zellers has a special place in the hearts of Sri Lankans. Known for its use of premium cocoa and its commitment to the ‘bean-to-bar’ concept, Zellers created chocolates that were not only rich in flavour but also in heritage, and it is this very tradition that the brand aims to revive with a range of new offerings.

Aiming to appeal to both the nostalgia of the Zellers experience and the new tastes and ideals of the younger generation, Zellers is unveiling a reinvigorated portfolio of premium chocolates.

The core range includes beloved varieties like Milk Chocolate, Cashewnut Chocolate, Fruit & Nut Chocolate, and the ever-popular Crispies. With each bite, chocolate lovers can savour the perfect balance of rich Ghanaian cocoa and creamy milk, for a smooth, velvety, and utterly irresistible taste.

Commenting on the return of Zellers Chocolates, Kumudika Fernando – Chairperson of the Maliban Group said, “As the granddaughter of Mr. Hinniappuhamy, the founder of Zellers, I am incredibly proud to launch this iconic chocolate brand under the Maliban Biscuit Group. For decades, Maliban has been a beloved part of Sri Lanka’s Biscut culture. We are excited to rekindle that nostalgia with a modern twist, appealing to both loyal fans and a new generation of Zellers enthusiasts. This new range reflects our commitment to quality, innovation, and creating memorable moments for our consumers.”

Ranil urges voters to elect MPs with experience to handle ongoing economic crisis

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.