PRISL announces two landmark events to elevate polymer sector

Sri Lanka’s premier industrial exhibition COMPLAST-RUBEXPO-COMXPO 2025 from 29 to 31 August

The Plastics and Rubber Institute of Sri Lanka (PRISL), the nation’s apex body for the development of the plastics and rubber sectors, has announced two high-impact industry events for 2025 that promise to drive innovation, sustainability and excellence across the polymer value chain.

PRISL will also host the eighth edition of COMPLAST-RUBEXPO-COMXPO at BMICH, Colombo from 29 to 31 August. It will feature over 500 booths from more than 300 global and regional companies, making it the country’s most comprehensive industrial platform for the polymer sector.

PRISL Director General Chaminda Perera said: “COMPLAST-RUBEXPO-COMXPO 2025 is the epicentre where opportunity meets innovation and talent, whether you’re a start-up or a global manufacturer, this platform offers the connections, insights and exposure needed to thrive in today’s fast-evolving industrial landscape.”

Plastics and Rubber Processing Machinery, Smart Manufacturing and Automation, Sustainable Materials and Recycling Solutions, Packaging Innovations and Engineering, Applications in FMCG, Apparel, Construction, Agriculture and Mobility, Green Energy and Industrial Efficiency, and Skills, Education and Career Development.

With a strong focus on technology transfer, B2B engagement, product innovation and skill development, the exhibition will attract thousands of manufacturers, professionals, students and policy makers.

The PRISL Awards 2025 on 25 November will honour outstanding achievements across the country’s plastics and rubber ecosystem at the BMICH, Colombo.

Recognising enterprises, professionals, academics and entrepreneurs, these awards are Sri Lanka’s most prestigious national honours for the sector.

The PRISL Awards 2025 are not just a celebration of success — they are a challenge to raise the bar,” said PRISL President K.A.C. Vidyaratne.

Award categories are carefully aligned with industry priorities and will be adjudicated by independent expert panels to ensure credibility, transparency and national prestige. Categories include: Academic Excellence in Polymer Technology; Innovative Product of the Year (Gold, Silver, Bronze); Sustainability – Environmental Responsibility (Gold, Silver, Bronze); Most Outstanding Large Enterprise (Gold, Silver, Bronze); Most Outstanding SME – Plastics, Rubber, and Recycling (nine awards); Service Provider of the Year; Supplier of the Year – Plastics and Rubber; Sri Lankan Brand of the Year (SME Sector); Professional of the Year (Operator to CEO levels); Entrepreneur of the Year and Most Outstanding Exporter of the Year (Gold, Silver, Bronze).

“These awards reflect the values of innovation, ethics, resilience and forward-thinking — pillars of Sri Lanka’s industrial transformation, they are supported by both local and international partners. The previous edition was held in January 2025, recognising achievements from the 2024 calendar year,” Perera added.

Entries for the PRISL Awards 2025 officially closes on 30 September drawing significant interest from across the country’s polymer industry. A total of 30 awards will be presented across 11 distinct categories, reflecting the sector’s diverse achievements in innovation, sustainability, entrepreneurship and professional excellence.

Together, the PRISL Awards 2025 and COMPLAST-RUBEXPO-COMXPO 2025 reflect the PRISL’s unwavering commitment to elevating Sri Lanka’s polymer industry through innovation, collaboration and capacity building. These landmark events will not only spotlight national excellence but also strengthen global linkages, inspire future talent and catalyse sustainable growth across the value chain.

As PRISL continues to lead the transformation of the sector, all stakeholders — industry leaders, SMEs, professionals, academics and policymakers — are encouraged to actively engage and be part of this national movement toward a smarter and globally competitive industrial future.