Plans underway to reduce electricity charges incurred by Northern farmers

Plans are underway to submit a Cabinet paper to reduce electricity charges for farmers using electricity for agricultural purposes in the Northern Province, Agriculture and Plantation Industries Minister Mahinda Amaraweera said.

Amaraweera said recently that the decision was taken in consideration of the strong commitment of the people of the Northern Province to carry out all the work in relation to agricultural development, especially since there are people in the war torn Northern Province who have suffered for three decades due to the war.

Amaraweera added: ‘President Ranil Wickremesinghe is of the opinion that most of the money allocated to the ministries should in turn be provided to the people of the Northern and Eastern Provinces when implementing development activities.

‘People of the Northern Province suffered from the war that lasted 30 years. However, they didn’t give up farming even in the midst of those troubles.

‘Following the statement of the President, the farmers of the Northern Province have made a request to provide some relief when they use electricity in their agricultural activities.

‘Accordingly, steps are being taken to present a Cabinet paper asking for some relief for Northern farmers when electricity is used by them for agricultural purposes.’

The minister made these observations while participating in the inauguration of a Passion Fruit Production Technical Demonstration Park and a Jumbo Groundnut Production Farming Company, which have been installed in connection with the launching of a 100-acre passion fruit plantation in Kilinochchi, Akkarayankulam. The latter was introduced by the Agriculture Sector Modernization Project under the Ministry of Agriculture and Plantation Industries.

Nearly 200 farmers have got into passion fruit cultivation and the passion fruit factory was established with the participation of those farmers and declared open by the minister.

Passion fruit cultivation is being launched, targeting the export as well as the local market. Farmers are growing passion fruit in this farm so that they could obtain more yields by using new techniques.

The minister also inaugurated the factory bringing out jumbo groundnut-based products, involving 500 farmers in the villages of Karachi and Kandawalai in Kilinochchi.

Related Topics:Agriculture Minister AmaraweeraMinister Amaraweera presides at the launching of major agricultural projects in the North

European Chamber Report: Diversity, equity and inclusion crucial for Sri Lanka’s socio-economic development

SLT-MOBITEL teams up with BaseKit Platform UK to launch new web builder ‘CubKit’, empowering Sri Lankan SMEs

Agriculture Minister wants research stepped up to garner higher yields

Prelate urges Agriculture Minister to hear out farmers when taking decisions affecting them

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.