ComBank Digital launches new-paradigm ‘H2H’ services for corporate clients

The Commercial Bank of Ceylon has announced the launch of Host-to-Host (H2H) payment services for corporate clients as the latest addition to ComBank Digital Enterprise Solutions – the Bank’s comprehensive and powerful suite of cutting-edge digital banking solutions for SMEs and corporates.

H2H is an automated and secure solution that integrates directly with a corporate client’s Enterprise Resource Planning (ERP) system, and is designed to facilitate the electronic transfer of data between banks and their corporate clients. This technology eliminates the need for manual processes involved in payment transfers and reconciliations, making overall transaction management more efficient and reliable, the Bank said.

An automated solution for high volume data transfer between banks and corporate clients without having to sign in to a banking app or a web interface, the H2H solution allows clients to generate and transfer files in standard industry formats such as XML or CSV, through a secure channel established between the client’s ERP system and the Bank’s H2H platform. The system supports a variety of ERP platforms, including SAP, Microsoft Dynamics, Oracle Cloud, Odoo, and open-source ERP systems.

“ComBank Digital Enterprise Solutions with secure Host-to-Host integration represents a unified platform that supports business growth and digital transformation,” Commercial Bank’s Assistant General Manager – Digital Banking Pradeep Banduwansa said. “H2H opens up a world of opportunities for them to seamlessly conduct bulk transactions and automated reconciliation of payments between the ERP system and bank statements with enhanced efficiency and security, and offers instant access to all the data they need.”

He said Commercial Bank’s H2H solution is particularly tailored to enhance business capabilities by streamlining processes such as payments, collections, bulk file transfers, and reconciliation, all of which are critical for corporate clients handling large volumes of data. Besides payments, the solution encompasses data transmission to automated reconciliations, bank account inquiry through the ERP system without logging into a system of the Bank, LC transmission and processing of various requests from the Bank.

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.