Sri Lanka to announce completion of debt restructuring soon: president

ECONOMYNEXT — Sri Lanka is set to announce the successful completion of the island nation’s debt restructuring programme soon, according to President Ranil Wickremesinghe.

Speaking at a political rally in Gampaha on Sunday July 21, Wickremesinghe said the announcement will be made in the coming days.

“Our country was devastated by political turmoil, but Sri Lanka has the potential to thrive with pride. We must progress. We were on the brink of bankruptcy, but by making tough decisions, we advanced the economy. Without implementing this programme, we risk falling back into crisis. Despite seeking support from the opposition, we received none. Instead, they opposed our efforts. I worked not for personal gain but for the country’s benefit. However, neither the Samagi Jana Balawegaya (SJB) nor the Janatha Vimukthi Peramuna (JVP) provided the necessary support. While travelling around the world, they urge not to support us.

“Despite these challenges, we persevered. Today, we have successfully completed the debt restructuring program, and it will be officially announced in the coming days,” he said.

President Wickremesinghe addressed the nation on June 26 after Sri Lanka signed bilateral debt restructuring agreements with the Paris Club, India and China. In his speech, he acknowledged that restructuring of private credit has yet to be completed.

“In 2023, we successfully completed the restructuring of domestic debt. Now, we have also successfully concluded the bilateral debt restructuring with foreign countries. Our next objective is to reach an agreement with commercial creditors, which includes International Sovereign Bond (ISB) holders. By continuing on our current path, we are confident that we can achieve this agreement, and discussions are on-going,” he said at the time.

Sri Lanka was due to begin a second round of talks with sovereign bond holders that same week.

The South Asian nation has been attempting to restructure 12.5 billion dollars of sovereign bonds and about 1.7 billion dollars of past due interest following the declaration of an external default in 2022. According to reports, private investors are seeking some so-called macro-linked bonds whose final haircut is linked to dollar GDP as well as some standard or ‘plain vanilla’ bonds with an upfront haircut.

The style of bonds have not been used in sovereign restructurings before. In the latest round of talks more plain vanilla bonds may be discussed, sources aware of the thinking of some bond investors said.

Sri Lanka to begin second round of talks with ISB holders: reportSee more