Norfolk Foods presents innovative ‘Lean Mean Green’ range at THAIFEX ANUGA ASIA 2024, eyeing international growth

Norfolk Foods (Pvt) Ltd, a pioneer in frozen food manufacturing in Sri Lanka, recently participated in THAIFEX ANUGA ASIA 2024, Asia’s leading food and beverage trade show, held in Bangkok, Thailand from May 28th to June 1st, 2024. The company showcased its innovative Sri Lankan-inspired vegan cuisine product range, ‘Lean Mean Green’ (LMG), aiming to expand its presence in the global market.

As part of the Charoen Pokphand Foods Public Company Limited (CPF) Thailand, Norfolk Foods exhibited a wide variety of high quality, products made using authentic Sri Lankan ingredients including Polos Cutlets, Polos Burgers, Jackfruit Nuggets, and an assortment of gourmet pancakes. The LMG range, developed specifically for the export market, offers a unique fusion of Sri Lankan flavours and plant-based innovation.

Following the THAIFEX ANUGA ASIA event, Norfolk Foods also participated in the CP Group Global Sourcing Expo on June 4th, 2024, in Bangkok. This year’s expo provided an opportunity to showcase products as part of the CPF Group and explore potential synergies with companies worldwide.

Ameena Ziauddin, President/Managing Director Sri Lanka commented, “Our participation in THAIFEX ANUGA ASIA 2024 marks a significant step in our global expansion strategy. The LMG range represents our commitment to making Sri Lankan home delicacies accessible worldwide, using the country’s best assets – our local produce. The response from international buyers has been overwhelmingly positive, reinforcing our belief in the global appeal of Norfolk’s plant-based offerings.”

LMG offers a unique plant-based culinary experience, showcasing Sri Lanka’s rich cultural heritage through innovative products. Using traditional ingredients from Sri Lankan kitchens, LMG brings these flavours to the global market. The brand debuted in the UK at the International Food and Drink Exhibition 2023, partnering with The FoodFellas of the CPF Group, and aims to expand into new markets.

The LMG range features ready-to-cook products, stored at -18°C from freezer to fryer. These naturally plant based products stand out with clean labelling, contains no artificial Preservatives, Colours, Flavours, or MSG. Unlike many plant-based alternatives, LMG refrains from replacing meat, instead offers an authentic Sri Lankan culinary experience, preserving the integrity of its finest local ingredients.

LMG products are manufactured in an ultra-modern, HALAL certified, HACCP, ISO 22000 and FSSC approved production facility, ensuring superior taste and product integrity.

With over 30 years of experience, Norfolk Foods is poised to take the LMG range to new heights globally. The company’s strategy focuses on making these plant-based products widely available, catering to the growing demand for Sri Lankan cuisine in restaurants, hotels, and various eating spaces around the world.

Browns’ Exide introduces Sri Lanka’s very first E-Care Battery warranty

ComBank supports WNPS PLANT project to reforest the banks of Maskeli Oya

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.