Sri Lanka says backing letter condemning Israel’s ban on UN chief

ECONOMYNEXT – Sri Lanka, which was originally not signatory for a letter condemning Israel for banning the United Nations Secretary General (UNSG) entering into the country, said it is supporting the move which has been supported by more than 100 countries.

The move comes after Sri Lanka’s stance on the issue raised concerns over the island nation’s consistent support for conflict-hit Palestine and foreign policy under new President Anura Kumara Dissanayake.

“By Note Verbale dated 11 October 2024, Sri Lanka conveyed its desire to be a signatory to the Letter supporting the UN Secretary General, to the Permanent Mission of Chile in New York, which coordinated the Joint Letter,” Sri Lanka’s Ministry of Foreign Affairs said in a statement.

However, the Ministry did not explain why the country’s name was not included in the list of 105 signatories who signed the letter released last week.

The weekend newspaper Sunday Time quoting Sri Lanka Ambassador to the UN Mohan Peiris said “Sri Lanka Permanent Mission in New York (UN) had asked the Chilean mission that sponsored the letter in support of the UN SG that their names be added to the letter circulated on October 11th and had been informed by the Chilean mission that an updated version of the signatories would be released next week.”

The Ministry of Foreign Affairs said Sri Lanka has continued its long-standing and unwavering support for the Palestinian cause and has expressed solidarity with the Palestinian people throughout the years.

“Sri Lanka has voiced serious concerns regarding the current dire humanitarian situation in Gaza at multiple multilateral fora and supported the call for an immediate ceasefire.”

“Sri Lanka continues to support the mandated and essential humanitarian efforts of the United Nations in the Occupied Palestinian Territories, including consistent support to UNRWA (United Nations Relief and Works Agency).”

“Foreign Minister Vijitha Herath’s statement to the diplomatic corps in Colombo on 14 October highlighted the need to uphold the obligation to ensure the safety and security of UN personnel and the inviolability of UN premises at all times.”

Sri Lanka chairs the UN Special Committee to Investigate Israeli Practices Affecting the Human Rights of the Palestinian People and Other Arabs of the Occupied Territories, which was established by United Nations General Assembly Resolution 2443 in 1968, the Ministry said.

“Accordingly, Sri Lanka fully supports the Letter which defended not just the Secretary General but the UN mandate itself.” (Colombo/October 21/2024)