Tharinda and Pulindu Best  performers of Under 23 Tourney

Tharinda Nirmal Guruge of Bloomfield and Pulindu Perera won best bowler and best batsman awards in the recently concluded  Under 23 Inter club cricket tournament conducted by SLC. The off spinner Tharinda Gururge   ended the tournament  with highest wickets of  52 in nine matches with  five wickets hauls in four occasions  and a four wicket haul, Tharinda the former Richmond  skipper also  hit 184 runs with two  half centuries and finally was adjudged best player of the tournament.

Nugegoda asc left hand opener Pulindu  finished  most successful batter of the tournament  scoring highest  runs 896 runs in 8 matches  while he

Tharinda Guruge of Bloomfield receiving best bowler of the tournament award from Chairman of the tournament SLC Nalin Aponsu. (Pix courtesy SLC )

scored 4 centuries  and 2 half centuries  and he  has scored highest individual total of 223  the only double century of the tournament.

Pulindu a product of Dharmaraja College  Kandy   easily became the best batman of the tournament with his remarkable batting performances . Bloomfield and CCC  were declared joint champions in this tournament as the final ended in a draw at the SSC grounds . CCC skipper Anjala Bandara the second most successful batsman of the tournament his his third century at the final was adjudged player of the final Bandara  scored  707 runs in 9 matches with 3 centuries and 3 half centuries  while Negombo CC   skipper Kaveen Fernando was third place among the batsmen scoring 549 runs with a century and 4 fifties.

Ace Capital CC leg spinner Wanuja Sahan was finIshed second among the bowlers having 39 wickets with  3 five wickets and 3 four wickets hauls followed by Shehan Promod of Negombo CC  with 33 wickets.

Most successful batsman of the tournament Pulindu Perera (Nugegoda SC) 896 runs , Anjala Bandara (CCC) 707 runs, Kaveen Fernando (Negombo CC ) 549 runs , Ranesh Silva (Ace Capital CC ) 489  runs, Mineth Premaratne (Bloomfield ) 487 runs.

Most successful bowlers of the tournament Tharinda Guruge (Bloomfield) 52 wickets , Wanuja Sahan (Ace Capital CC ) 39 wickets, Shehan Promod (Negombo CC ) 33  wickets, Inuka Karanngoda (CCC) 31 wickets, Gishan Balasuriya (SSC) 31  wickets.