Monin creative cup debuts at National Barista Championship 2025

The National Barista Championship, held in partnership with the Hotel Show and Sri Lanka Hospitality Graduates Association, is set to spotlight a new wave of barista creativity with the launch of the Monin Creative Cup. Designed to challenge and inspire, the Monin Creative Cup invites participants to push the boundaries of coffee innovation by crafting unique, coffee-based mocktails that blend skill, flavour and flair.

From a series of regional workshops held across the island, over 40 talented baristas took part in this year’s competition, representing the best of Sri Lanka’s vibrant Hotel, Restaurant and Café sector. Of these, 13 semi-finalists were selected to compete in the Monin Creative Cup, with the top 6 finalists now advancing to the final round on 25th July at the BMICH, during the prestigious Hotel Show Colombo 2025.

A special Master Class was recently held at ‘Studio R’ by Beverage Specialist Asif Iqbal for the semi-finalists, with the objective of enhancing their knowledge.

Speaking on the collaboration, Shalindri Malawana, General Manager of Liquid Island, commented, “As an organization, we are proud to be part of elevating the craft of coffee and empowering young baristas across Sri Lanka. The Monin Creative Cup reflects our commitment to training and development, offering a dynamic platform for baristas to showcase their creativity.”

Distributed by Liquid Island Private Limited, the French company Monin is a world leader in premium syrups, sauces, and purées, with a market presence in more than 140 countries. With over 200 flavours in its range, Monin’s influence extends beyond ingredients—it champions creativity and craftsmanship, helping baristas and beverage professionals elevate their offerings to global standards.

People’s Bank CEO/GM Challenge T20 League Tournament concludes in Batticaloa

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.