Sri Lanka’s PickMe, Motatuwa uni to study linking trishaws with trains and buses

ECONOMYNEXT – Sri Lanka’s Pick Met, a ride hailing company said it had tied up with the university to study and find solutions to communities who are facing difficulties in accessing transport and also looking at multi-modal transport.

“The collaboration aims to address long-ignored mobility challenges across diverse segments of the population,” the company said in a statement.

“With a population of 22 million people facing a wide range of mobility needs, from rural villages with unmarked roads to urban centres with complex traffic dynamics, PickMe and the University of Moratuwa are seeking to design scalable, locally relevant solutions.”

“This includes tackling issues such as optimising transport in areas with limited GPS-based map coverage, designing user interfaces for low-literacy communities…”

Moratuwa University and PickMe would also look at integrating “integrating multiple modes of transport, such as buses, trains, and three-wheelers into a unified mobility ecosystem through technology.”

The results could “redefine the future of homegrown technology innovation in the country” by developing solutions designed specifically for the Sri Lankan context, the firm said.

PickMe has information which needs to be better analyzed to determine the evolving needs of the public, Chief Executive Jiffry Zulfer.

“What we require now is qualitative analysis and research, and this is where universities like Moratuwa can play a vital role,” he said.

“We need the human element: the ability to dig deeper into the behavioural patterns of society, to bring innovative thinking, and to help us understand the directions in which citizens of Sri Lanka are seeking solutions to improve their lives.”

The partnership allows advanced research without PickMe having spend on a separate Research and Development division, while the Moratuwa university benefits from real-world application for its academic work.

“This initiative empowers our students to explore future mobility solutions while strengthening Sri Lanka’s technological advancement journey,” Niles Perera, Head, Department of Transport Management & Logistics Engineering, University of Moratuwa said in the statement. (Colombo/Aug31/2025)