Axiata’s Telecom chief foresees $1 Trillion opportunity for global telcos

Axiata Group CEO and Executive Director, Dr Hans Wijayasuriya says the telecommunications industry needs to look past its mistakes of not adopting new technologies fast enough and seize the opportunities in AI.Speaking as a keynote speaker at Digital Transformation World (DTW24 Ignite) in Copenhagen on June 19, Dr Wijayasuriya said that the telecom sector stands on the cusp of a transformative era.

Dr Wijayasuriya highlighted the potential for telcos to tap into a growing $1tn by moving beyond traditional connectivity to offering end-to-end solutions. He said that it’s time for telcos to unite on a global level to access this emerging market. The future of telecom lies in shifting from simply providing connectivity to offering comprehensive digital solutions. The current challenge for telcos is not just about growth and that significant value can be unlocked by addressing customer demands for new ways to purchase services.

A crucial part of this transformation involves exploiting network APIs (Application Programmable Interfaces) to foster innovation and value capture. Axiata has been proactive in this area, engaging with 50,000 external developers and exposing over 100 APIs externally.

Dr Wijayasuriya said the industry needs to “move from connectivity to a world where we sell end-to-end solutions” as there is “another trillion dollars up for grabs”, essentially doubling the size of the connectivity space.

To succeed, telcos must embrace collaboration with hyperscalers and other telecom operators, viewing them as allies rather than competitors.

“Peer telcos are allies in this ecosystem, not foes. If we don’t realize this, we can forget about that $1 trillion,” Dr Wijayasuriya said.

He pointed out the need for a strategic shift for telcos to secure sustainable growth and innovation in an increasingly digital world. By capitalizing on new digital service opportunities and embracing radical changes, telcos can prevent another round of disintermediation and create substantial value for customers and stakeholders alike, he said.

DTW24 Ignite, held from 18-20 June, brought together industry leaders, innovators, and stakeholders to explore the future of digital transformation in the telecommunications sector. It provides a platform for sharing insights, strategies, and technological advancements that can shape the industry’s future.I

AIA’s top performers represent Lanka at President Club Convention in Cannes

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.