CMA Sri Lanka to host Integrated Reporting and Sustainability Accounting Standards Workshop

Initiative under the distinguished patronage of International Federation of Accountants President Jean Bouquot

The Institute of Certified Management Accountants of Sri Lanka (CMA Sri Lanka) will host an Integrated Reporting and Sustainability Accounting Standards Workshop under the distinguished patronage of International Federation of Accountants President Jean Bouquot tomorrow Thursday, 22 January) from 8.00 a.m. to 1.30 p.m. at the Cinnamon Grand, Mahogany Ballroom, Colombo,

CMA Sri Lanka is a Member of the International Federation of Accountants (IFAC) the global organisation for the Accounting Profession dedicated to strengthening the accounting profession worldwide. Established in 1977 IFAC has over 187 members and associates in 140 jurisdictions, representing more than 3 million accountants in public practice, education, government service, industry, and commerce.. IFAC’s mission is to develop high-quality international standards, promote strong professional ethics, and support the growth of sustainable and transparent financial reporting. Its work ensures that accountants play a key role in fostering trust, accountability, and sustainable economic development globally.

The distinguished presence of the IFAC President Jean Bouquot to Sri Lanka recognises the global recognition given to the Sri Lankan Accounting Profession and the important role they can play for the economic development and creating skills of both academic and practical experience making them ready for employment both in the Private, Public and Government sector.

CMA Sri Lanka has organised this high-profile workshop to enhance awareness and practical understanding of Integrated Reporting and Sustainability Accounting Standards, bringing together regulators, corporate leaders, sustainability practitioners, finance professionals, and academics under its Continuing Professional Development (CPD) programs.

The event will begin with an inaugural ceremony, featuring a welcome address by CMA Sri Lanka Founder President and CMA Excellence in Integrated Reporting Awards 2026 Chairman Prof. Lakshman R. Watawala.

A Special Guest Address will be made by Diesel and Motor Engineering PLC Director/CFO and CMA Excellence in Integrated Reporting Awards 2025 Diamond Award Winner Suresh Gooneratne

on the Development of Integrated reporting in Sri Lanka and Application of New Sustainability Standards.

The Chief Guest and keynote address will be delivered by IFAC President Jean Bouquot, who will share global perspectives on the future of the accounting profession, integrated reporting, sustainability standards and the role of Professional Accounting Organisations (PAO).

A key highlight of the event will be the launch and presentation of the “Technical and Judges Panel Report” of the CMA Excellence in Integrated Reporting Awards 2025. Insights from the Judges’ Report will be discussed by Department of Accounting, University of Sri Jayewardenepura Senior Professor in Accounting

Member Judges Panel CMA Excellence in Integrated Reporting Awards 2025 Senior Prof Samanthi Senaratne while a detailed presentation of the report will be delivered by CMA IR Committee Senior Committee Member Darshini Watawala.

The event will also feature a Special launch of the CMA Management Accounting Journal to signify the distinguished presence of the IFAC President Jean Bouquot.

The technical session 1 (Topic :Achieving Excellence in the Preparation of Outstanding Integrated Reports ) will feature presentations by award-winning organisations Talawakelle Tea Estates PLC, Softlogic Life Insurance PLC, Hayleys Fabric PLC, and LB Finance PLC, showcasing best practices and innovations in integrated reporting and sustainability. This Session will be chaired by CMA IR Awards Committee Senior Member D.S.W. Andradi and co-chaired by CMA IR Awards Committee Senior and Lecturer in Accounting University of Sri Jayewardenepura Senior Member Isuru Manawadu.

Technical session 2 (Topic: Integrated Reporting and Sustainability Accounting Standards) will be a panel discussion on Integrated Reporting and Sustainability Accounting Standards, chaired by Professor of Accounting at the University of Sri Jayewardenepura Senior Prof. Samanthi Senaratne and co-chaired and Moderated by Senior Member Evaluation Committee and Prof in Accounting University of Sri Jayewardenepura Prof Roshan Ajward. It will bring together senior finance and sustainability professionals from leading corporates and financial institutions.

Following the workshop and lunch, CMA Sri Lanka will host an exclusive CMA Students’ event, providing a valuable opportunity for CMA students to interact directly with the IFAC President, engage in dialogue on global developments in the accounting profession, and gain insights into future career pathways at an international level.

The event underscores CMA Sri Lanka’s commitment to strengthening professional excellence, transparency, and sustainability in corporate reporting, while fostering meaningful engagement between global professional leaders and the next generation of management accountants.

The support given by the International Federation of Accountants for the development and recognition of the Management Accounting Profession in Sri Lanka and the role played by the Institute of Certified Management Accountants of Sri Lanka a professional accounting body incorporated by an Act of Parliament to its membership, corporates, government and public sector and the students to develop specialised skills in the accounting profession is portrayed with the distinguished presence of the Global President Jean Bouquot at these events.