Würth Lanka awarded Great Place to Work® certification

Würth Lanka (Pvt) Ltd, the leading automotive aftermarket, hardware, industry, and construction solutions specialist, was recently awarded the Great Place to Work certification, affirming its status as an employer of choice in Sri Lanka’s corporate landscape. The certification recognizes Würth Lanka’s commitment to providing an outstanding employee experience while instilling trust, pride, and camaraderie among its workforce comprising sales, customer service, administration, and HR.

“We are delighted to have been awarded this prestigious certification, placing us amongst the handful of corporate heavyweights in Sri Lanka. The certification comes hot on the heels of our strategic management level adjustments, and adds another milestone to our many significant achievements,” said Suranga Kekuluwalage – Managing Director, Würth Lanka (Pvt) Ltd.

The Great Place to Work certification helps Würth Lanka stand out as a top competitor and attract the young, capable talent it needs to pursue its medium- to long-term goals.

“As a fully owned subsidiary of Würth GmbH of Germany, we have access to Würth’s vast portfolio of products and solutions spanning several industries such as vehicle aftermarket, construction, etc. Based on our strategic priorities, we have planned and budgeted for the expansion of our portfolio. We are confident that we are in a good position to attract, hire, and retain the talent that we need to support our plans,” he added.

Würth Lanka builds the brand from within the organization and, in turn, motivates its employees to champion it at all times. It is an inside–out program, and every employee is proud to wear the Würth brand, which is reflected in every activity that is carried out. This is the secret to the brand’s success and employee motivation. The Würth branding is coupled with standard employee activities such as internal marketing, continuous employee grooming programs, foreign tours, and overseas training programs; corporate platforms to engage with international Würth officials; and external brand activities and engagements where the Würth brand is highly trusted and recognized.

EFC new Chair reaffirms commitment to national employment policies and responsible business initiatives

Extension of the term of the Administrator appointed to Nation Lanka Finance

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.