Govt. vs. Reason

Power makes governments impervious to reason and even drives them to amend the Constitution to achieve their political objectives. Unsurprisingly, the JVP-NPP government is in an indecent hurry to extend the retirement ages of judges. A draft constitutional amendment aimed at achieving that end received Cabinet approval yesterday. However, the government’s determined efforts to secure the passage of the questionable constitutional amendment without holding a referendum are bound to come up against a brick wall due to a judicial precedent.

Speaking in Parliament yesterday, Opposition Leader Sajith Premadasa pointed out that the Supreme Court (SC) had stated in a 2022 judgement that the retirement ages of the judges of the SC and the Court of Appeal (CA) could not be revised without people’s approval at a referendum. The SC has held that the retirement ages of the SC and CA judges are specifically prescribed by the Constitution, unlike those of ordinary public officers, and therefore any Constitutional amendment to the retirement ages or the period of office impacting on incumbent judges, whether directly or indirectly, will impinge on the independence of the judiciary and be violative of Article 3, which requires a referendum. This welcome judicial precedent will surely be the biggest obstacle in the government’s path on the legal front where its ill-conceived constitutional amendment is concerned. A referendum is the last thing the JVP/NPP needs while doing everything in its power to delay the Provincial Council elections further, unable to face them.

Pressure is mounting on the government on the political front to walk back its decision to raise the retirement ages of judges and abort its expedient project to amend the Constitution. It is only wishful thinking that the government will be able to bulldoze its way through simply because it has a two-thirds majority. The fate that befell the Gotabaya Rajapaksa government is a case in point.

President Anura Kumara Dissanayake and his government are coming under increasing international pressure to abandon its efforts to meddle with the constitutionally stipulated judges’ retirement ages. The International Association of Judges (IAJ), the world’s largest global organisation representing judges across the globe, has also called upon the government to reconsider the proposed constitutional amendment. It has said in a statement that it shares the serious concerns already raised by the Judicial Service Association of Sri Lanka and the Commonwealth Lawyers Association (CLA) regarding the proposed legislation.

The IAJ, which represents 93 national associations of judges across five continents, has stressed that its concerns are not about the concept of changing the mandatory retirement age of judges but about “the timing of and the manner of introduction of, and the widely perceived reason for this proposed legislation”. It has expressed serious concern about the widespread perception that the proposed legislation is intended to benefit one or more specific judicial officers.

According to the IAJ, constitutional amendments affecting the judiciary should be introduced through “a reasoned, principled, consultative and transparent process”, rather than through “an arbitrary and ad hoc announcement”. The IAJ has warned that failure to follow such a process could threaten judicial independence.

Thus, the government’s efforts to vilify the opponents of its plan to extend judges’ retirement ages arbitrarily as supporters of former corrupt rulers fearing incarceration have come a cropper. The JVP/NPP cannot accuse prestigious international organisations, such as IAJ, LAWASIA and CLA of being supporters of corrupt Sri Lankan politicians, can it? Similarly, the Mahanayake Theras have written to President Anura Kumara Dissanayake, urging him to abandon the government’s plan to increase judges’ retirement ages arbitrarily. The Church of Ceylon has also urged the government to withdraw its proposed constitutional amendment to extend the retirement ages of judges, warning that the move threatens judicial independence, lacks moral legitimacy, and undermines the rule of law.

It is hoped that the government will be wise enough to listen to reason and abandon its Gadarene rush to amend the Constitution to raise judges’ retirement ages. That is the least it can do to avoid undermining judicial independence and getting mired in a politico-legal imbroglio.

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.