HNB and ICC collaborate to offer tailored home financing

HNB Mortgage Advisor/Junior Executive Chamila Jayawickrama, Home and Personal Loans Manager Sampath Dodanwala, Personal Financial

Services Manager Asitha Fernando, Personal Financial Services AGM Kanchana Karunagama, ICC Managing Director/CEO Namal Siri Peiris, Executive Finance Director Nalin Sriyantha Fernando, Property Development General Manager Roshani Perera, Marketing Head Randula Jayasooriya and Sales Administration Assistant Manager Prabanjana Abayadeera

Reiterating its efforts to bring the best possible deals to customers investing in their dream home, HNB PLC, entered into a Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) with the International Construction Consortium Ltd. (ICC), to offer exclusive financial solutions to prospective homeowners of the developer’s latest project, the Residencies Kotte, located in the capital city of Sri Lanka.

HNB AGM – Personal Financial Services Kanchana Karunagama said: “We are proud to extend our commitment to empowering homeownership together with the ICC, through helping aspiring homeowners tackle the housing landscape with tailored financial solutions. In tandem with ICC’s expertise in construction, we’re dedicated to making the journey to homeownership seamless and fulfilling.”

Through this partnership, customers can avail themselves to special interest rates and other benefits from HNB, as well as convenient and flexible repayment options tailor-made to their budgets, during the promotional period which ends 31 December 2024. To provide maximum support, the bank’s dedicated agents also support customers with legal documentation needed for the facility. Moreover, HNB’s backend processes ensure a speedy loan approval process.

“Our latest project in Kotte is located in a prime area, just minutes from the Monarch Imperial Hotel. We are making steady progress with Tower A, while we just completed the super structure for Tower B. At this rate, I believe that our collaboration with HNB, ensures a seamless path for customers looking to own their dream home,” said ICC MD/CEO Namal Peiris.