Invest Sri Lanka forum to be held in Singapore

ECONOMYNEXT – The Colombo Stock Exchange and the Securities and Exchange Comission of Sri Lanka will hold an investor form in Singapore on August 12 with senior state officials, investors and listed companies participating.

“Building on the momentum of the successful foreign investor forum held in Colombo during March this year, the initiative aims to further engage with global investors and promote Sri Lanka’s capital market as an attractive frontier investment destination,” the Colombo Stock Exchange said in a statement.

The forum will bring together high-level government officials, regulators, listed companies, stock broker firms, and international investors to foster connections and promote long-term capital flows into Sri Lanka. The SEC and CSE have invited Hon. Prof.

Anil J. Fernando, Minister of Labour and Deputy Minister of Economic Development; P Nandalal Weerasinghe, Governor, Central Bank of Sri Lanka and Senarath Dissanayake, High Commissioner of Sri Lanka to Singapore will be among the panelists.

Desai, Fund Manager, Asia Frontier Capital Ltd; and Naveen Gunawardane, Managing Director, LYNEAR Wealth Management, will also share their insights, highlighting the country’s ongoing economic reforms, financial stability, and capital market potential, the CSE said.

Eleven listed companies will also participate in the forum, showcasing investment opportunities.

At a current market Price-to-Earnings (P/E) ratio of 9.20x, Sri Lanka’s equity market remains competitively valued relative to peer markets, offering strong upside potential for investors seeking frontier market exposure, the CSE said.

In 2023, the All-Share Price Index (ASPI) posted returns of 25.50 percent and the S&P SL20 16.42 percent. In 2024, ASPI returns were 49.66 percent and S&P SL 20 58.46 percent.

There were foreign inflows 66.5 million dollars in 2024 and raised raised 568.61 million dollars in capital.

“Engagement from the March investor forum that has translated into an uptick in foreign inflows, adding to the market’s positive trajectory,” the CSE said. (Colombo/Aug11/2025)