Ranil still in dilemma of contesting for Presidency claims Prasanna

Urban Development and Housing Minister Prasanna Ranatunga yesterday said Ranil Wickremesinghe is in a dilemma with his decision to run for the upcoming Presidential poll.

“People are waiting to see if Ranil Wickremesinghe will contest the Presidential election or not. If he decides to come forward, I believe he will garner widespread support,” he told journalists in Minuwangoda.

Ranatunga however expressed strong support for Wickremesinghe’s potential candidacy in the upcoming Presidential election, citing that he is the most suitable leader to guide Sri Lanka through its current economic crisis.

He argued that only by continuing Wickremesinghe’s program could the country be fully liberated from its economic woes.

The Minister criticised the need for new leadership, asserting that Wickremesinghe’s experience and international connections make him uniquely qualified to lead the country. “Personally, I support Ranil Wickremesinghe if he decides to run. He has the experience, the international connections, and most importantly, he has already made significant contributions to turnaround the economic crisis in a short time,” Ranatunga stated.

He also noted that leaders from the Samagi Jana Balawegaya (SJB) and the National People’s Power (NPP) have indirectly acknowledged that the current President’s program is crucial for the country’s recovery.

“The country has no other option but to reinstate Ranil Wickremesinghe as President, as the situation is not suitable for experimenting with new leadership,” Ranatunga added.

Reflecting on his own political journey, Ranatunga admitted that he did not always support Wickremesinghe but stressed the importance of making decisions based on the country’s needs. “There was a crisis during the tenures of Mahinda Rajapaksa and Ranasinghe Premadasa as well. Politics is such that not everyone will be liked by all, but we must think about the country’s needs and make decisions accordingly,” he added.

When questioned about the possibility of another candidate from the Sri Lanka Podujana Peramuna (SLPP) stepping forward, Ranatunga reiterated that Wickremesinghe is the most suitable candidate, proven by his actions.

“People are eagerly waiting to see if he will announce his candidacy. If he does, I believe he will secure the support needed to lead the country forward,” the Minister said.