Victor Melder turns 90: Railwayman and bibliophile extraordinary

Victor Melder is a household name in Melbourne. He is one of the best known Srilankans living in Australia. This came about because of the unique library that he has accumulated over many years with a combination of perseverance, determination and self-sacrifice. The Victor Melder Srilankan Library, (VMSL) is unique and has been of great service to Australians, SriLankans and many in different parts of the world. It is used by researchers pursuing a master’s degree or a doctorate, by other writers to various magazines, newspapers and websites, judging by the various accolades that the library has received over the years.

Another area it has been used is in genealogy. It has been a boon for those looking up their family tree. The eminent genealogist, Kyle Joustra acknowledges the data he has gathered from the VMSL. International writers on such topics as Cricket, Tea, Coffee, Plantations in general have drawn from this fount of knowledge. It has a full set of the journals of the Dutch Burger Union among the various rare publications

The number of what it holds has grown to about 7,000 books, magazines and journals. Thus, it records not only historical material, but of the passing scene. The ephemera that form part of the social scene are preserved for posterity. The contents have been painstakingly catalogued by Victor. The service is provided free of charge. This is in keeping with the spirit of service that characterizes Victor.

The son of an engine driver of the Ceylon Government Railway (CGR), Victor followed his father into the profession and drove steam locomotives (later diesel engines) until he resigned in 1968 to join the rest of his large family in Australia. What follows he recounts chapters of a fascination life in the CGR nd in Australia where he built his valuable library freely available to researchers and others interested.

Late last year, the Sri Lankan community in Melbourne entertained two special people who turned ninety. The event was graced by the Consul General for Sri Lanka in Melbourne and many distinguished personalities. The nonagenarians both had a love of books. Victor Melder is a household name in Melbourne, well known for the Victor Melder Sri Lankan Library and Hugh Karunanayake, a man of letters with encyclopedic knowledge of men and matters.

This article is about the former. Many articles have appeared in the press and digital media about Victor and his many achievements over a long period of time. The present focus is on Victor Melder, the man. There are multiple aspects to his personality. His background, His love of family, his passion for books, endearing interest in the Ceylon Railway, and his deep faith in the Catholic church. Underlying all this is the spirit of service, which is evident in whatever he has done.

Victor was born in Kandy, on September 16, 1935 to a Railway family. Father Randolph was an engine driver and grandfather too worked for the railway, His mother was born in Bangkok, Siam. His maternal grandparents met while working in Bangkok. In 1909, they had responded to an advertisement for young people to work in Bangkok. Grandfather worked for the Royal Siamese Railway as store man and his grandmother taught needlework at the King’s palace. After their marriage and the birth of three children they returned to Ceylon in 1919.

Victor was the eldest of 11 children. His father was a strict disciplinarian. Life was routine with school and back, working in the garden with dad who excelled in gardening and had a collection of rare plants. Due to his father working in a transferable service, Victor spent his childhood in Kandy, Matale, Nanu Oya, Kadugannawa, Bandarawela, and Nawalapitiya. This explains his wide knowledge of the hill country. In between he spent time with his maternal grandparents who had a six-acre property at Peradeniya. Mother was a “tower of strength” and one look from her was sufficient to convey that “all was well”. Father was a man of strong principle and immense faith in God.

Let me quote Victor in his own words about his life in the Railways.

“When Dad was transferred to Kadugannawa, I was almost 18 years of age, and began to be treated as an adult, there was no pressure to work in the garden, and for the first time sat with him on equal terms as any adult father and son would do. The following year I began working at the Kandy Municipality as a clerical officer, which I continued until joining the railways as an apprentice engine driver.

I joined the CGR in October 1956 and was appointed engine driver in October 1962. The apprenticeship, though tough and strenuous, was something I enjoyed the most. As an apprentice, we had to serve nine months at Nawalapitiya, performing what was termed “Upper Section Firing”, (working the Garratt locomotives). Dad was stationed there then. Whilst working with him on a few occasions, I had the opportunity to learn much, as he excelled in putting the theoretical side into practice by demonstrating how to perform running repairs and other day-to-day requirements on a working locomotive.

My crowning moment was, when one day working as an engine driver, I was able to salute my father from ‘my’ locomotive, and he saluted me back from ‘his’ locomotive. I feel he felt quite proud that day of himself as I was of myself. My working on the railways brought me much close to my father, we would sit for hours discussing and swapping yarns about everything railway whenever we met.”

The following excerpt from Victors, writing on Oh to be an engine driver highlights the rigorous training that engine drivers underwent before they received the Indenture from the Government.

“Once upon a time, when steam was King, it was every young boy’s dream to become a steam locomotive driver. Mine was no different, it was heightened by the fact that my father was an engine driver too. Unfortunately, with dieselization and the disappearance of the steam loco, this dream has now vanished for most young boys.

“My grandfather, Victor Melder, was a Guard on the Ceylon Government Railway and served from 1897 to 1926, when he passed away prematurely of a heart attack. My father, Randolph Melder, served the railways as an Engine Driver from 1923 to 1963.

“It was a colonial tradition that sons of employees in many services were given preference to employment in the field of their father’s occupation. This was also true with the railways, where sons of railway men had preference. It was argued that with their father being a railway man they would be aware of the vagaries of the job and therefore be more suited to it.

“I had to wait until 1956 before I realized my dream but was able to get in by about three months, as the cutoff point was 21 years and had the recruitment program been initiated three months later, I would have missed out on the age criteria.

“The recruitment notice specified the candidates should have passed the Senior School Certificate, (English) its equivalent or higher, but for sons of past or present employees of the Ceylon Government Railway (CGR) the Junior School Certificate (English) or higher. Railway Firemen with adequate experience, Seventh Standard (English) or higher.

“Other criteria were that applicants must be of good physique, height not less than five feet five inches (without shoes or socks) and chest measurement not less than 33 inches (normal). Appointment was subject to a medical examination and eyesight test.

“Selected applicants would be on probation for three months. Provided their work and conduct during this period are satisfactory, they will be retained in service and indentured for five years apprenticeship. Written tests will be held at the end of eight months training and again at the end of the second year of training to assess the suitability of the trainees.

“During the period of apprenticeship, they must attend instruction classes and perform whatever duties may be detailed. They are subject to the authority of the drivers whom they are booked to work with.

“On completion of training, apprentices will be required to pass a theoretical and practical test to prove their suitability for appointment to the grade of Engine Driver, Class III, to fill any existing vacancies. Those who fail the test will be re-examined at the end of another year. Failure in the second test will tender an apprentice liable for discontinuation.

“Applications for apprenticeships closed on June 21, 1956. I was interviewed by a panel of three (which included Mr Maxwell Sparkes, C.C.S, who was seconded for Railway service) on September 18, 1956 at the General Managers Office, C.G.R., Colombo. A fortnight later I was informed by post that my application and interview had been successful and that I reported for duty at 9.00 am on October 16,1956.

“As I lived at Nawalapitiya at the time of application, I had to attend a medical examination and eyesight test at the Kandy General Hospital, prior to taking up duties. This was successful. And so began an arduous and rigorous training schedule, which in my case was extended by eight months, since I was eight months off work, having contracted Infective Hepatitis in 1958, after drinking contaminated water off a steam locomotive tender. The department was kind enough to allow me to do three months’ light duty (off the footplate) giving me time to recover further.

“There were 50 apprentices recruited and we were given the title Special Apprentice Driver (SAD), we were numbered from 51 to 100 (don’t ask me why), and my official position was SAD 63. The title Special Apprentice was because we were being trained on both steam and diesel locomotives. A normal steam apprenticeship was of four years duration, in our case an extra year was tagged on for diesel locomotives.

“Of the 50 apprentices appointed, one was a complete outsider, 22 were sons of railway men and 27 were firemen promoted from the ranks. Before appointment as Engine Driver, one went Absent Without Leave (AWOL), two (from the ranks) were demoted for falsifying education certificates and one failed the eye test, whilst three immigrated to UK and Australia, leaving only the balance 44 to pass out as engine drivers.

“The first three months were quite a novelty indeed, working in the sprawling Dematagoda Running Shed, acquainting ourselves with the various steam locos in service. The daily grind consisted mainly in cleaning the boilers and tenders of the locos and also checking the under carriages of the bogie tables by working in the pits, as this was the only way to access them. It was a mundane 7.00 am to 4.00pm job, with an hour off for lunch from 11.00 to 12 noon. We worked a five-day week, plus half day Saturday. All the apprentices were deemed fit to carry on their training and had to sign the indenture papers.

“THE PITS were dangerous places to work in, they were about four to five feet deep, had a few inches of water running through them constantly and plenty of oil that had drained off the locos, whilst being serviced so one had to step very gingerly. As these were locos that were in steam, one had to be wary of falling embers. The bogie tables generally had ash and other grit that had to be scraped off and oiled. Occasionally one would find pieces of putrefying flesh from animals hit by the locos whilst ON THE RUN.

“The next three months was working with an assigned fitter on the various locos, carrying minor repairs, again this was a day job, with Sunday’s off. The following three months were indeed an eye opener as we were assigned as fireman on the steam shunting locos working round the clock, seven days a week at both Maligawatte Yard and Colombo Goods Yard (between Maradana and Fort Stations).

“The shunting locos at Maligawatte Yard worked in the carriage stabling yard, where passenger trains were formed and got ready for service. Colombo yard was mainly a goods or freight wagon yard again where goods trains left from and also arrived from the outstations. As such there was an inwards yard and an outwards yard. There was constant movement in these yards both day and night. It was interesting firing these shunting locos, where the pace of movement was slow and easy, preparing one for the hectic pace on the footplate for the passenger services.

“The next three months, saw us once again in the Dematagoda Running Shed working with the fitters on heavy and large repairs. This section of the work was with locos that were out of service, unlike the second three months, which were mainly running repairs. This was again a mundane job of five and a half days. All of sudden the first year had come to an end, combined with the practical work, the lectures and demonstrations, one had by now a working knowledge of steam locos and was trained to carry out minor repairs, so much so, as to be able to nurse a disabled loco home, rather than seek assistance en route.

“At the start of the second year, saw work on the footplate of passenger trains begin. The first four months was in the role of the second fireman on the open line. The duties were mainly to ensure the head fireman had an adequate supply of coal readily available on hand for firing whilst on the run (all coal had to be broken down to the size of one’s fist for easy firing and ignition).

“The duties also included assisting in watering the locos at watering points enroute and checking when possible that the lubrication points (outside the loco) were in order and topping up with lubricants when and where necessary. One was also expected to keep a sharp lookout whilst on the run, which included the position of signals etc.

“The next four months saw us graduating to the role of head fireman. In the case of the lower steam link, this was a one fireman position, for short distance trains. The duties were combined roles of both head fireman and second fireman. The next four months, saw us in the role of head fireman on long distance trains, with an allocated second fireman. This was a responsible task, always maintaining a steady head of steam and water, and maintaining a presentable footplate. Another year had gone by.

“The beginning of the third year saw us firing on the long-distance trains and fast good trains, which seemed to always run at night. One had an assigned Engine Driver to work under and an assigned second fireman, which resulted in teamwork, to ensure the trains arrived at their destinations on time. A head fireman and second fireman, come on duty at least an hour before the driver did. By the time the driver comes on duty, the loco would have its boiler cleaned or brushed down, watered and ready for take-off, with a full head of steam. The driver would carry out a cursory inspection of the loco and be ready to whistle at the appointed time.

“FIRING TRAINS on both Upper and Lower sections, were different to each other. In the Colombo area, where the railway did not encounter much hilly terrain, one had to fire infrequently compared to the constant climbing which required frequent firing of the loco to maintain a steady head of steam and water. On the lower section, express trains were much easier to fire, than stop and start trains, as they did not need that much firing.

“On the Upper section, due to the frequency of the firing that took place, the firebox tends to fill up quickly and halfway up the incline, one would have to clean out the excess ashes from the fire box, by rocking the firebox grate to drop the ashes off. This was necessary to ensure good ignition and to maintain a bright fire, required for steaming qualities. It was very strenuous and demanding WORK.

“The next four months, saw the 50 apprentices temporarily stationed at Nawalapitiya, for upper section service. This was where the Beyer Peacock Garrat locos were in service. Mercifully they had been modified from coal burners to oil burners and only required one fireman, as there was no stoking of the firebox, but a regulator lever operated to control the flow of furnace oil that fired the loco. What looked like a laborious task was quite simple indeed, if one maintained a steady head of steam for the journey.”

Pioneers in Healing: The Presidents Who Shaped Sri Lanka’s Healthcare (Volume 1)

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.