Insights into Sri Lanka’s ‘fear-driven politics’

In a candid and impassioned address to a group of supporters, a National People’s Power (NPP) National List candidate, Benita Prishanthi Hettithanthri, laid bare Sri Lanka’s political history, highlighting the importance of the country’s current political moment.

Addressing an audience of women, in Colombo recently, she touched on decades of political turmoil, fear-driven elections and systemic corruption, painting a picture of a nation that has long been manipulated by divisive politics.

“We are in Sri Lanka at a very exciting moment, Benita began. “We have had a huge change in our political area… no one expected that we could have such a big change as what we experienced in bringing our President to power.”

Benita’s address delved deep into Sri Lanka’s political landscape, tracing the manipulation of fear that has driven many of the country’s election cycles. From the civil war to racial tensions, the audience was reminded of the fear-based narratives that have historically shaped voter behaviour.

She added: “One time there was fear that we are going to be attacked, there’s going to be war or we will lose,” recounting how citizens were often misled into voting without considering economic or social policies. “People voted not looking at the economy, not looking at anything else other than the fear that was fed into us in various ways.”

Referencing pivotal moments such as the burning of the Jaffna Library in 1981 and the tragic events of Black July in 1983, Benita called for a national reckoning with the country’s past. While those responsible for these acts have seldom been brought to justice, the speaker praised the 2016 apology from former Prime Minister Ranil Wickremesinghe regarding the Jaffna Library.

Despite past turmoil and being branded as terrorists by political opponents, the NPP has emerged as a formidable force in Sri Lankan politics, she claimed.

Thilan Wijesinghe joins Mahindra Ideal Finance Board as Independent Non-Executive Director

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.