Protests, strikes must stop for some time for Sri Lanka to recover under SJB govt: MP

ECONOMYNEXT — A future Samagi Jana Balawegaya (SJB) government will reduce taxes and utility bills, increase state revenue and create an investment-friendly environment, for which protests and strikes may have to take a back seat, an SJB MP said.

“We will definitely reduce taxes and bills. We will enter new markets and increase state revenue. We’ll create an investment-friendly environment. Protests and strikes must be stopped for some time,” SJB legislator S M Marikkar said.

Speaking to reporters, Marikkar said a “somewhat tough” administration is called for.

“Sri Lanka and Vietnam used to have similar economic growth rates. But today, there isn’t a single rupee of foreign direct investment (FDI) coming in. Vietnam had 35 billion US dollars in FDI just last year (actual figure was 36.6 billion).

“We have to understand this reality and maintain a somewhat tough administration, won’t we?” he said.

The SJB has been critical of what the party has been calling the authoritarian tendencies of President Ranil Wickremesinghe’s government. Since Wickremesinghe’s ascendancy, the party and its leadership have issued strongly worded statements on the government’s attempts at quelling protests and new laws such as the Online Safety Act.

Government spokespersons have defended itself claiming that many of the protests were the work of saboteurs attempting to disrupt Sri Lanka’s ongoing reform backed by the International Monetary Fund (IMF).

Asked to comment on a recent remark by Palitha Range Bandara, general secretary of the President’s United National Party (UNP), that a group of prominent SJB members were planning to cross over to the UNP, from which the SJB broke off in 2020, MP Marikkar intimated that Bandara was bluffing.

“They have been saying for one and a half years now that this one will go and that one will go. I don’t think there are idiots in the SJB,” said Marrikar.

“This is President Wickremesinghe’s final days. I don’t trying to insult him, but he is over 75 years old. People won’t be voting for anyone over 75 this time,” he said. (Colombo/Mar04/2024)