Ambassador in Jordan visits factory employing 1,100 Lankans

Sri Lanka’s embassy in Jordan last week successfully concluded an outreach program in an apparel factory in Aqaba employing over 1,100 Lankans, located 325 km from Amman, with a view to easing difficulties employees may be facing, an embassy news release said.

Ambassador Priyangika Wijegunasekara and her staff were welcomed to the GIA Apparel factory by its group operation manager, Saman N. Disanayakage, who offered 500 new employment opportunities for Sri Lankans in the upcoming projects, the release said.

Addressing the gathering, the ambassador appreciated the importance of the role of the Sri Lankan workforce in the factory, not only in increasing Jordan’s exports but also in transferring knowledge and expertise to the Jordanian labour market. She also stressed the significant contribution made by them towards the Sri Lankan economy by transmitting foreign worker remittances to Sri Lanka.

She emphasized the embassy’s commitment to ensuring the welfare, safety, and security of Sri Lankans by providing necessary consular and other assistance. She also thanked the group operation manager of the factory for offering new employment opportunities to Sri Lankans and facilitating the factory visit.

During an interactive session with Lankan employees, topics such as human smuggling, trafficking and consular matters were covered while the Bank of Ceylon representative in Jordan engaged with the Lankan workers and educated them on effective ways of sending remittances, opening new accounts, etc., the release said.

“The visit saw a positive exchange of ideas and the embassy reaffirmed its commitment to maintaining close coordination with the factory’s senior management and the Lankan employees,” it said.

SLT-MOBITEL Enterprise strengthens collaboration with MBSL to deliver cutting-edge connectivity solutions

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.