Standard Chartered appoints Praveen Karunaratne to Country Management Team

Standard Chartered Sri Lanka has appointed Praveen Karunaratne, Head of Financial Institutions (FI), to the Country Management Team, effective 15 Sept.

Praveen’s appointment to the Country Management Team ensures strategic oversight and continued development of critical Financial Institutions relationships, reinforcing Standard Chartered’s commitment to institutional banking excellence in Sri Lanka.

Financial Institutions represents a rapidly growing segment and forms a core pillar of the Bank’s global business strategy, targeting 60% of Corporate & Institutional Banking revenue by 2029. The appointment recognises the strategic importance of the Financial Institutions business for Standard Chartered in Sri Lanka.

Standard Chartered’s Financial Institutions business provides essential services including correspondent banking, trade finance, treasury solutions, and capital markets access to local banks, non-bank financial institutions, investors and public sector entities. Standard Chartered maintains the position as the leading correspondent banking service provider for Sri Lankan banks, holding over 30% market share in international clearing and trade.

In his role, Praveen oversees the critical areas of Banks & Broker Dealers, Public Sector, and Investor client segments. Under Praveen’s leadership, the FI business will continue to strengthen the Bank’s market position, expand product offerings, and deliver sustainable growth aligned with the Bank’s global strategy.

Having joined Standard Chartered in 2010, Praveen brings extensive experience in client coverage, business origination, and risk management. He assumed the role of Head of FI in August 2023 following a successful tenure as Director – Local Corporates. His 15-year journey with the Bank demonstrates Standard Chartered’s commitment to nurturing internal talent and providing comprehensive career development opportunities.

Ceylinco Life launches ‘Family Savari 19’ with fun in Beijing, Malaysia and Pearl Bay

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.