Serendib Flour Mills to celebrate marketing excellence as sponsor at SLIM Brand Excellence Awards 2024

Serendib Flour Mills aims to celebrate outstanding marketing achievements as the Bronze Sponsor at the SLIM Brand Excellence Awards 2024.Organized by the Sri Lanka Institute of Marketing (SLIM), the national body for marketing, the annual SLIM Brand Excellence Awards is a highly anticipated event that recognizes the country’s top marketing achievements. It serves as a platform for healthy competition among local marketers, inspiring them to achieve international standards. The awards program is a testament to SLIM’s dedication to making marketing a pivotal force in Sri Lanka’s economy.

SMFL’s sponsorship is a testament to its commitment to excellence and eagerness to contribute to the growth and development of the marketing sector in Sri Lanka. The company’s involvement will undoubtedly enrich the event, adding value to the overall experience for attendees and participants.

As a Sponsor SFML is a supportive partner in celebrating excellence in branding, reinforcing the company’s reputation as a forward-thinking company, recognizing top-tier brand achievements.

For the past 15 years, SFML has stood as a trusted cornerstone of Sri Lanka’s food industry making a significant role in both food security and safety. Dedicated to ‘Nourishing the Nation’ the company has demonstrated excellence through the delivery of the highest quality flour and the introduction of groundbreaking innovations to the Sri Lankan market. Today, SFML’s value-added offerings significantly enhance Sri Lanka’s food ecosystem and contribute to building a healthier nation.

Serendib Flour Mills, a wholly owned subsidiary of the Dubai-headquartered Al Ghurair, one of the leading diversified family businesses in the United Arab Emirates (UAE), as the sponsor of SLIM Brand Excellence, promises the event will recognize Sri Lanka’s best creativity that will drive growth and uplift the marketing fraternity.

SriLankan Airlines named Leading International Airline in South Asia at SATA 2024

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.