Shane and Shehan appointed to the driving seat at Triad

Triad (Private) Limited – Sri Lanka’s leading homegrown, independent, “global local” integrated communications powerhouse – has appointed Shane Wilson as Chief Executive Officer (CEO) and Shehan Samarasinha as Chief Operating Officer (COO). The appointments mark a significant milestone in Triad’s journey as a leader in creative communications solutions in Sri Lanka. Shane and Shehan infuse new blood, and a blend of youth and international experience to Triad, further elevating its strategic and creative capabilities, in the new age of integrated communications.

Giving younger people opportunities to lead and shine is a noted hallmark of Triad’s “API” – we are all one family – culture, and its corporate ethic of ‘purpose beyond profit’. In an industry that sees frequent changes in ownership, form and success, Triad’s ability to thrive for three decades and more is attributed to its ability to revolutionise the traditional, to creatively adapt to challenges and to identify, groom and empower the right talent at the right time for the right purpose. Driven by this ethos, Triad has proudly identified, nurtured and empowered over 100 professionals, who are now in top leadership positions across the corporate sector, fostering a new generation of leaders that are generating wealth and creating value in Sri Lanka and beyond.

The appointment of Triad’s new CEO and COO thus sees former-CEO Sarva Ameresekere transition to the role of an Executive Director, while Triad’s co-founder Varuni Amunugama Fernando remains Managing Director of the Company, and Ashika Karunathilake serves as Group Financial Officer, ensuring that the Agency’s youthful vision and leadership is balanced with the experience and oversight of the Board.

Newly-appointed CEO Shane Wilson has an impressive 30-year career in advertising, having worked at both global and local agencies. He joined Triad in 2012 as a Brand Planner and has steadily risen within the firm, serving as Chief Operating Officer for the past five years. Shane’s hands-on expertise spans specialised areas such as sports marketing, retail engagement, and consumer activation programmes.

Economic Transformation Bill first step towards economic stability – President

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.