Amma’s sudden and going to sea “when you can’t even swim”

(Excerpted from Simply Nahil – a maverick with the Midas touch, the biography of Nahil Wijesuriya)

Digging deeper into his life in the UK, he tells me that despite all the highs during the time he spent in London, easily the lowest would be the day he got a call from his brother-in-law, Lakshman Karalliedde, urging him to make his way back to Sri Lanka immediately. “Lakshman informed me that my mother was sick and I needed to get back home fast,” he said.

He left the UK, secure in the fact that with doctors in the family she was in good hands. Unfortunately, once in Colombo, he was informed formed that she had passed away from a heart attack. He was about to turn 24 years and in shock. “Amma’s sudden death was by far the most devastating single incident in my life,” says Nahil.

The only immediate solace he had were his dad and siblings who, though going through the same emotions, were a source of comfort. At the time of her passing his parents were living at No. 04 Galkanda Road, Aniwatte, which remains their family home to date and where his mother’s ashes were interred in the family burial grounds in the compound. His dad who lived to the ripe old age of 97 finally joined her in the same resting place in 2011.

After a moment’s pause, the conversation still centered on his mother’s death. “Amma was a diabetic, I am convinced that the German medication, Rustinon, prescribed for controlling her sugar, somehow contributed to the onset of her heart attack.” This was an era where testing blood sugar and other tests were done in a Bunsen burner. His mother’s sugar was high when it was tested the Bunsen burner way at his home. Thankfully Rustinon manufactured by Hoertz was withdrawn from the market many years back. He returned to London a few days after her funeral.

Leicester College done and HND (Higher National Diploma) in Mechanical and Production Engineering in hand, he was contemplating returning to Sri Lanka when fate played a different hand. He had extended his visa thrice due to Tuula. Besides he was wasting his father’s money hanging around in the UK. His options were either to find a job immediately in engineering to stay on or return to Sri Lanka.

As fate would have it, a day later, a friend, Ratnasiri de Silva, who was also an ex – Walkers apprentice, a willing victim of ‘Flower Power,’ who had just concluded his contract on a ship, requested Nahil who was very familiar with getting around in London to accompany him to a job interview he had with a shipping company in the East End, including visits to other shipping companies in the area.

Ratnasiri was the son of the former Member of Parliament for Habaraduwa, Mr. G.V.S. de Silva, a great economist who was the private secretary to Mr. Phillip Gunawardena, a founder of the Marxist movement in Sri Lanka, and Minister of Agriculture, Food and Cooperatives, in the cabinet of the late Mr. S.W.R.D. Bandaranaike. GVS was responsible for drafting the controversial Paddy Lands Act, which gave tenant cultivators some rights.

Following their visit to four shipping companies in the East End, they got to Leadenhall Street, where the impressive P&O office was located. Ratnasiri had an interview with P&O Lines. While Nahil sat around waiting for him, Ratnasiri got back from the interview looking dejected. He conveyed to Nahil that he felt his interview did not go well and he was sure he was not getting the job. Nahil asked Ratnasiri if he would mind him facing the interview, to which Ratnasiri agreed gracefully, requesting Nahil to go ahead.

He met the interviewer, David Long who was impressed with his qualifications. He aced the aptitude test which made David question whether he had done it before. Nahil told him, “No it was just too easy.” Amazingly, he ended up with the job his friend was interviewed for! The post was for Fifth Engineer on the ship MV ‘Chakdhara,’ a ship belonging to the British India Steam Navigational Company – P&O Shipping Lines. Nahil was told he could join any time and when he called dad with the exciting news his dad’s response was, “What on earth were you thinking accepting the job? How can you go to sea, you can’t even swim! “

The British India Steam Navigation Company (BISNC) was formed in 1856 as the Calcutta and Burmah Steam Navigation Company formed out of Mackinnon Mackenzie & Co, a trading partnership of the Scots William Mackinnon and Robert Mackenzie, to carry mail between Calcutta and Rangoon. The 3,035 tonne, MV Chakdara on which Nahil sailed as Fifth Engineer was built in 1914, purchased by BISNC in 1933 and eventually sold to Scindia SN Co., in the 1970s renamed MV Burmenstan.

Shortly after Nahil got his job as a Marine Engineer, Tuula returned to Finland, subsequently settling down in Stockholm, Sweden. He says her absence in his life was painful, but he had to be rational in his decisions even at the cost of a broken heart. This was the period in history when the Suez Canal was closed and ships coming from the Atlantic had to go around the Cape of Good Hope to get to the Far East, a 54-day sail. He was missing her so much that he disembarked in Hong Kong, and immediately boarded a flight to Stockholm, on his way to see Tuula again. After spending two awesome weeks with her, and much tears and sadness, it was a ‘forever goodbye’.

Crew on SS Nowshers — Nahil (L), Vasaniha Gnanakone and buddies

Still at P&O Lines in 1972 he had the opportunity of traveling to Europe to train on a Sulzer RND 1050 diesel engine at the main research centre in Winterthur, Switzerland. This was an excellent addition to his qualifications. He knew the big guys at the Head Office were fond of him; this was confirmed to him later on. Being tenacious, he took full advantage of their affection to get transferred to different ships every three months, even though the standard rule was a few years per ship. His agenda was to get the opportunity to work on different, new engines, thereby gaining more experience. As he kept transferring to various vessels, expanding his knowledge and experience, he was able to work on five large engines manufactured in the UK, Germany and Holland.

He was able to work on a steam engine, which was an excellent, opportunity as his ultimate goal was to work on the best diesel engines in the world manufactured in Switzerland. When he sent in his request it was granted. A few days later he jetted off to Switzerland for a month to experience and work on the best engines being developed there.

There was an Indian sailor named Mike Rozera, a Second Engineer on another ship owned by P&O, who was envious of Nahil, and was always trying to find ways and means to get at him.

As a Fifth Engineer, part of Nahil’s job was to take the log of the first watch and enter the details in the proper logbook stored in the cabin of the Chief Officer. While attending to the job at hand, he noticed the personal files of the employees stacked on a shelf in the Chief’s cabin and decided to glance through his file. He found a letter of introduction that read ‘he is an exceptional eastern service recruit and we look forward to his progress,’ which had been forwarded from the Mackinnon office in Bombay, while requesting a report of his progress. Mike Rozera had read this file, hence his jealousy towards Nahil.

On his return from training in Switzerland, he re-joined P&O Lines, sailed a few voyages and then resigned and returned to Sri Lanka. joining Ceylon Shipping Corporation as Second Engineer on the ship `Lanka Kalyani’ captained by Baba Virasinghe, the first Sri Lankan Captain, whose predecessors were all British. Their first voyage together was to Rangoon via Singapore, their first port of call. Baba had made the news as the first local to captain a Sri Lankan ship.

They had just taken the ship over from the Chinese with absolutely no prior knowledge of the functioning of the vessel – things like where exactly to trace the pipelines or any function in the area of engineering. They sailed two hours after taking over the ship, with Nahil leaving it to chance.

While they were sailing on a river in Rangoon that looked like a sea, a pilot had to guide them through a channel deep enough for the ship.

“Suddenly,” says Nahil, “I heard the engine slowing down because the diesel tanks were running out of fuel.” He was in his cabin when he heard the engines slowing down and was flustered as he had had no time to trace the pipelines before leaving Singapore. He knocked the tanks to pump up by which time the generator was exhausted and the engines slowed down further. Finally, he messed around with the pipes to help the trapped air to escape and realized the tanks were filling up, which helped him prime the engines and get it started.

Without the engines, the ship drifts and it can’t be controlled with the rudder; controlling the vessel with the rudder is possible only when. the engine is on full throttle. To his chagrin, the navigator was requesting full speed, unaware the engine was not functioning properly. Nahil took about five minutes to get it all sorted and thankfully they were on their way.

This was when he told Baba, “First Sri Lankan Captain of a ship. but you could have also been the first Sri Lankan Captain to run the ship aground.” They were great friends and famously contradicted each other’s version of the incident. Sadly after a stroke a few months back. Baba passed away.

Towards the latter part of 1975, his father had heard about his dalliance with a divorcee with two kids, whom Nahil would shack up with whenever his ship came into Sri Lanka. As you can imagine, once his father heard about this through the ‘grapevine’ he was livid. One fine day, on being informed that Nahil was at the Wijemanne flats in Green Path with her, he made his way there and sent up a message to Nahil.

“I came down to meet him and he says, ‘What you are doing is bloody disgraceful. If your mother was alive you would have never done something like this.’ Saying this, he started crying.” In a moment of self pity, Nahil blurted out, “It seems everything I do is wrong. Why don’t you find someone for me? If I can get on with 30 hairy seafarers for months on end on a ship, I can get on with anyone.”

Nahil’s father had heard from a friend that a family he knew in Negombo was looking for a groom for their daughter. He took the initiative and gave Mrs. Senanayake — a family friend — the job of setting up the venue for Nahil to meet the young lady and her parents. He knew there was no easy way out and agreed to see her. Of course, like any sensible youth, he first wanted a glimpse of this lady before he committed himself to meeting her in person. The stage was set one Wednesday morning at Mrs. Senanayake’s batik shop, down Dickman’s Road. The plan was for the prospective bride to visit the shop with her mother, while father and son walked around looking at batiks. Things went as planned. They walked in. The rest, as they say, is history…

A few days later an official ‘face-to-face and meet the parents’ was set up at the Blue Lagoon Hotel in Negombo. Since his father was in Kandy, ‘aunty’ Senanayake accompanied him to the meeting.

He had the pleasure of driving ‘aunty’ to Negombo that evening in his MGTF, which had the hardest suspension. The poor lady did not find it pleasurable at all as she was thrown around and bumped along to Negombo. Her return trip to Colombo was less traumatic, thanks to his intended father-in-law who made arrangements to send her back in an alternative vehicle.

Hector de Silva was a landed proprietor and a coconut mill owner in Katana. Indrani was the only girl and the youngest in her family while her brothers, Ajith and Manik, were acquainted with Nahil since Manik studied at Trinity around the same time as Nahil. Once they got to the venue and the introductions were made, Nahil found Hector to be a great conversationalist. They got talking to each other while having drinks, losing track of the real reason he was there.

He had not spoken one word to the girl since he arrived, until Hector said, “Why don’t you and Indrani have a look around this place?” They did just that — walking around the garden and getting to know each other. For the next few days, he drove every day to see her at her home on Ave Maria Road, Negombo, until their wedding.

Ten days later, with the usual fanfare, they got married one sunny September day at the Capri Club in Kollupitiya. One distinct little thing he remembers of the wedding is the song ‘Kadalla’ sung by the wedding band. This was a song made popular by Mignonne Rutnam.

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.