Vidullanka commissions 2 MW solar project in Horana

Vidullanka PLC yesterday said it commissioned a 2 MW solar plant, constructed by its subsidiary, Vidul Solar Power Ltd.

This marks the successful completion of the second phase of the Horana Solar Project. The new facility has an AC capacity of 2 MW and a DC capacity of 2.5 MW, with the ability to export approximately 3.6 GWh of clean energy annually to the national grid, the company said.

The inauguration ceremony took place on Saturday (16) and was graced by Energy Minister Eng. Kumara Jayakody, Ceylon Electricity Board and Sustainable Energy Authority officials and representatives of key Government and civil authorities.

This milestone brings Vidullanka’s total portfolio to 23 operational power plants with a combined installed capacity of 63 MW in the renewable energy sector.

This plant serves as the second phase of the Horana Solar Project. The first phase was awarded under the Government’s 150 MW tender and upon its commission in June 2023, it became one of the only two projects in the program to reach completion, along with Vavunathivu Solar, another project co-developed by Vidullanka.

While the Vidul Solar Power Plant faced delays earlier this year due to local concerns, decisive action by the Sri Lanka Sustainable Energy Authority (SLSEA) and the Divisional Secretariat helped build community awareness and pave the way for construction to proceed, the company said.

Vidullanka’s CEO Riyaz Sangani said: “Sri Lanka is rich in its own indigenous renewable resources. Harnessing them is vital for our nation’s energy security. It is imperative to the future of Sri Lanka’s energy security that we recognise the value of the resources that Sri Lanka is rich in and the power that can be drawn on to energise the country.” This plant is the second project the company has commissioned during the last two months and work at two other power plants is in progress at an expedited phase to commission before the year end.