Stredge launches Reach High

Following its recent strategic rebranding, Stredge launched ‘Reach High’—a consultancy company for leadership and people development and executive coaching interventions. The new company marks the latest addition to Stredge’s portfolio of businesses, a company news release said.

Founded locally with its global headquarters now in Dubai, Stredge had worked with diverse businesses for nearly a decade, navigating operational, financial and strategic change. The company brings extensive hands-on experience in organisation-wide transformation initiatives, restructuring programmes, leadership interventions, culture transformation, capability development and business performance improvement, the release said.

Its recent addition, Reach High builds upon the experience of successful leadership, coaching and transformation engagements delivered through Stredge Advisory (Pvt) Ltd, while providing a dedicated platform to address the growing demand for people-centred transformation, it added.

“Reach High brings together a team of experienced practitioners with expertise in leadership development, executive coaching, communication coaching, organisational transformation and performance improvement. The new company is also equipped to carry out impactful assessments to support recruitment and talent development. The experienced leadership of Reach High combines decades of transformation expertise, regional exposure and proven client impact to help organisations unlock their full potential.”

Noting that Reach High is a move to deliver greater value to clients, Managing Director of Stredge Advisory (Pvt) Ltd and Group Director of Reach High Coaching, Sumedha Wijesekera said: “Today companies recognise that long-term growth depends not only on strategy and systems, but also on leadership quality, culture and people capability. Reach High is initiated to provide a sharper focus on these critical areas. We are proud to enter this new chapter and confident that Reach High is exceptionally positioned to help organisations strengthen leadership capability, develop high-performing teams and create cultures that drive long-term success.”

Group Director and strategist behind the Reach High concept, Janaka Epasinghe said that Reach High reflects the growing need for specialised people-centric solutions in an increasingly complex business environment. “Our purpose is to help leaders gain clarity, strengthen capability and create meaningful impact within their organisations. We believe that when individuals realise their true potential, organisations achieve extraordinary outcomes.”

Further strengthening its leadership team, Chinthaka Dharmarathne has come on board as its Managing Director. He brings nearly 30 years of leadership experience gained through a distinguished career with HSBC, where he led strategic people-initiatives across Asia Pacific region. “Our ambition is not simply to participate in the market. We aspire to establish Reach High as Sri Lanka’s premier leadership and people-development consultancy, recognized for delivering exceptional coaching and organisational transformation, with a reputation for excellence that extends across the region,” he said.

The story behind Reach High extends beyond professional credentials. The three leaders behind it, first forged a shared sense of purpose as teenagers when they participated in a school expedition to the Himalayas in the early 90’s. The experience instilled values of resilience, aspiration, teamwork and perseverance that would continue to influence their personal and professional journeys.

Decades later, after building successful careers across business transformation, leadership development and global human capital management, they have come together around a common vision: helping individuals, teams and organisations realise their full potential.

Prof. Fazeeha Azmi becomes Lanka’s first woman envoy to Iran

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.