Sri Lanka state minister of finance declares support for president

ECONOMYNEXT — To prevent a return to Sri Lanka’s most severe crisis in its history, it is essential to continue to support President Ranil Wickremesinghe, State Minister of Finance Shehan Semasinghe said after his party decided not to back the president.

“Under President Ranil Wickramasinghe’s leadership, Sri Lanka has made significant strides in overcoming the most severe crises in the history. His clear and decisive leadership has guided the nation toward stability and growth. To prevent a return to such challenging times, it is essential to continue supporting President Wickramasinghe’s vision and initiatives. We need to protect the country before our political views. Together, we can build a prosperous future for our country,” Semasinghe tweeted in the early hours of Tuesday July 30.

His announcement came hours after the ruling Sri Lanka Podujana Peramuna (SLPP) decided not to back President Wickremesinghe at the 2024 presidential election, opting instead to field its own candidate.

This is not the first time Semasinghe has openly endorsed Wickremesinghe. He and a number of other influential members of the SLPP continue to back Wickremesinghe’s bid for election.

Several ministers and deputy minister who represent the SLPP have said they will support Wickremesinghe at the upcoming election, dissidents told reporters after its executive committee decided to field its own candidate.

We will try to get the party’s support for President,” Energy Minister Kanchana Wijeskera, who had earlier come out publicly in support of the President, said after the SLPP made its official decision not to back Wickremesinghe.

“But what we decided today was to support President Wickremesinghe. He is coming as an independent candidate. About 90 percent of the ministers and parliamentarians came to the meeting.

“We are still in the position for the party to take a decision without splitting it.”

SLPP National Organizer Namal Rajapasksa said the party supported Wickremesinghe from 2022 but from now on it will not support him any longer.

“I think as a party we took the best decision,” he said. (Colombo/Jul30/2024)