Lanka Aluminium collaborates with SLIA to organize factory visit for architects

Lanka Aluminium Industries PLC, Sri Lanka’s pioneering aluminium extruder, in collaboration with the Sri Lanka Institute of Architects (SLIA), recently facilitated a full-day visit to its aluminium extrusion factory in Ekala, Ja-Ela. The factory visit was arranged as one of the programmes under the “Specification Writing for Architects” programme, which was initiated by the President of the Sri Lanka Institute of Architects – Ms. Dilumini De Mel, who also joined the visit with a group of senior architects.

Lanka Aluminium will continue to organize similar programmes to raise awareness of aluminium extrusion-based products and solutions for government institutions, supplementing the many similar programmes already carried out.

“We have the in-house knowledge and expertise to assist the architects and consultants in choosing the most appropriate systems. This is essential for the success of any installation, to ensure optimal performance and value. For example, an over-specified window system will unnecessarily increase costs, while an under-specified system will result in poor performance,” stated Dinal Peiris, Chairman – Lanka Aluminium Industries PLC.

The pioneer in the aluminium extrusion industry in Sri Lanka, Lanka Aluminium Industries PLC is a BOI-approved public quoted company specializing in the manufacture of high-quality aluminium extrusions for architectural, hardware, transport, and specialist applications. It has over 40 years of experience providing aluminium extrusion solutions of the highest standards and quality for buildings and high-rises. Some of these have been recognized with international awards. The leader in innovation and design, their products are manufactured to meet British and other international standards while keeping abreast of the latest industry trends.

Commercial Bank voted Sri Lanka’s ‘Most Loved’ banking brand for third consecutive year

Sun Siyam Pasikudah hosts Miss Polski 2026 finalists for exclusive photoshoot on Sri Lanka’s East Coast

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.