Mega scene with Gypsies …Down Under

The Gypsies is one band that has the ability, and the talent, to cater to the musical tastes of a wide and varied audience and they proved it in a mega way during their recent tour of Australia, taking in Perth, Sydney and Adelaide.

Surprisingly, Melbourne wasn’t included, and that’s a happening place where Sri Lankans are concerned, but leader Piyal Perera has a valid explanation.

“We didn’t take in Melbourne because we were there in February, this year, and we generally like to keep a gap of about one year before we return.”

The concerts in Perth, Sydney and Adelaide were well patronised – in fact, it was ‘sold out’ at all three venues.

On social media, this came up regarding the band’s concert in Perth:

“Sold Out! The Gypsies are ready to bring the house down in Perth on 31st August at the Indian Community Hall! Get ready for an unforgettable night of music and dance. Thank you to all our fans for your incredible support!”

And, it turned out to be a memorable happening for the Gypsies, and also for a former member of the band who now resides in Perth with his family – Arith Ratnawibhushana.

Arith was associated with the Gypsies many years ago; he played keyboards for most of Piyal’s original songs, initially, including the ‘Ojaye’ cassette.

Says Arith: “I was also involved in Piyal’s first English original song ‘Happy Birthday To You’, and also ‘You Are The Best.’

Arith was there for the Perth concert and was called on stage, by Piyal, for old times’ sake.

“I did one song with the band. There was an amazing response for the Gypsies in Perth – a sell-out concert and dance – and it certainly brought back nostalgic memories to me.”

Arith went on to say that the Perth concert was organised by Rostrata Events and that they did a fantastic job as the event was sold out one month in advance.

The feedback, regarding the concert, was stupendous, with one group of fans saying they enjoyed the Gypsies show more than the Coldplay concert!

The Sydney show, too, was a huge success and this was one of the comments that showed up on social media:

“GYPSIES – Thank you for the music. The legendary band from Sri Lanka, with a history of half a century, proved to SYDNEY fans again, you’re still number one and going strong as ever‼

“What a magnificent show you delivered in Sydney on Friday (6th September), on the day of the late legend Sunil Perera’s 3rd year death anniversary, celebrating his legacy and the music.”

“A huge thank you to everyone in Adelaide who came to the ‘Ojaye’ Dance with the Gypsies concert! Your presence and energy made it an unforgettable night. And a massive shout-out to the Gypsies band; the performance was pure magic!”

Back home, the Gypsies have already moved into top gear, keeping their legions of local fans entertained … before embarking on more foreign assignments, including a tour of Europe in 2025.

ApiDenna duo Piyaland Shenal: Creatingthe excitement onstage for the Gypsies

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.