Opposition Leader Sajith Premadasa has  no right to talk about the farmers – NPP MP Susantha Kumara Navaratne

National People’s Power Parliamentarian Susantha Kumara Navaratne stated while addressing the media in Medawachchiya on Sunday (21), that current Opposition Leader Sajith Premadasa has no right to talk about the paddy farming population of this country.

He also stated that it is possible to imagine the future of the Opposition when you see the people sitting in the front row seats at the United National Party Convention held on Saturday (20), but if all those who have destroyed this country for years come together and think of changing the direction the current government is travelling upon, it is just another dream of the Opposition.

In order to distribute trophies and certificates to those who participated in the programmes held for 7 days, in conjunction with the Provincial Week, based on the instructions of the Medawachchiya Pradeshiya Sabha Chairman D. Wimalathunga, the Punarudaye Purawara programme of the Local Government Week organised by the Medawachchiya Pradeshiya Sabha, held at the Medawachchiya Library Auditorium on Sunday (21) evening. NPP MP Susantha Kumara Navaratne who was the Chief Guest at the closing ceremony, further said that the Opposition while searching for topics of the week and is spreading various distorted ideas and ideologies among the people. We responsibly say that the current Government will never forget the farmers. We have already taken basic steps to solve the problems identified by the farmers.

MP Rohana Bandara of the current Opposition recently submitted a proposal to Parliament regarding the purchase of paddy which is a problem for farmers. When Parliament ended, neither the Opposition Leader Sajith Premadasa, who had endorsed the proposal, nor MP Rohana Bandara were present in Parliament. A group that cannot wait to at least find out the Government’s response to that proposal, has no right to talk about farmers.

Also, the Opposition leader had recently visited the village of the current President, Comrade Anura Kumara Dissanayake, and met with the farmers. Accordingly, we believe that the Opposition leader, Sajith Premadasa, has no right to talk about the farmers at all.

The event was attended by the Maha Sangha, the Investigation Officer of the Provincial Councils Department, representatives of all Government institutions in Medawachchiya, and the Pradeshiya Sabha staff.