VFS gears up to promote Sri Lanka amid visa woes

Sri Lanka Tourism confirms no such discussion has taken place as yet

VFS says SL tourism promotion will be “comprehensively carried out through new eVisa platform”

VFS Global, which is currently facing a backlash, vows to boost Sri Lanka’s global image through a robust marketing plan with Sri Lanka Tourism. However, the details remain under wraps from the tourism authorities, Mirror Business learns.

The objective of the promotion is to achieve growth in inbound arrivals from the source markets, utilising its global network, as per the vision of the government to achieve five million tourist arrivals in Sri Lanka, VFS Global said in a statement to the media that ran six pages, consisting of details regarding its operations and plans in the island nation.

When Mirror Business reached out to the Sri Lanka Tourism Development Authority (SLTDA) for clarity in this regard, Chairman Priantha Fernando said neither the institution nor the Tourism Promotions Bureau is aware of any such plans.

“I don’t think so. They haven’t spoken to me about promoting Sri Lanka. Ideally, it would have been with the Promotions Bureau. Its chairman is not in the country and the person in charge is hands on; no mention has been made,” said Fernando, affirming that no proposals of any sort have been shared as yet by VFS Global with Sri Lanka Tourism.

“They may be having plans with the controversy going on. But we are not aware,” said Fernando.

The entity, headquartered in Zurich and Dubai, typically manages non-judgmental and administrative tasks related to applications for visa, passport and consular services for its governments; it came under harsh criticism last week for its visa charges and the manner in which it rolled out its services.

With regard to helping Sri Lanka’s tourism landscape, VFS Global in its statement noted that the promotion of the island nation would be “comprehensively carried out through the new eVisa platform”.

“VFS Global will leverage its extensive network and will predominantly target India, Russia, the UK, Germany, China, Australia, France, the USA, Canada, the Maldives, Netherlands, Spain, Switzerland, Italy and Japan, which contribute to approximately 80 percent of tourist arrivals,” it said.

The plan outlined by VFS Global has five key components. The first is road shows and travel trade engagements in key locations to highlight destination training and webinars, B2B newsletters and promotion of new itineraries.

While it facilitates media engagements promoting Sri Lanka via trade travel media, public relations and promotions in B2B trade magazines, it plans to promote the destination through VFS Global digital platform and the visa application centres.

It pointed out that it would also receive publicity to Sri Lanka through display advertising, digital standees, roll-ups, brochure/flyer placements and on corporate websites, while also carrying out social media marketing and online advertising to increase destination awareness and visibility.