India’s 77th Republic Day celebrations in Sri Lanka

The Indian High Commission in Colombo celebrated India’s 77th Republic Day in Colombo yesterday.

It was on 26 January 1950 that the Indian Constitution – the world’s longest written Constitution –entered into force. The Preamble to the Constitution declares India to be a Sovereign, Socialist, Secular, Democratic Republic.

On the occasion, Indian High Commissioner Santosh Jha unfurled India’s national flag at India House – the residence of the Indian High Commissioner– and inspected the Guard of Honour. He also read out excerpts from Indian President Droupadi Murmu’s Republic Day address.

The event featured patriotic songs by the Sri Lanka Navy Band and a vibrant cultural program organised by the High Commission’s cultural arm, the Swami Vivekananda Cultural Centre, celebrating India’s rich diversity through captivating dance and music performances.

This year also marks an extraordinary milestone – the 150th anniversary of ‘Vande Mataram,’’ the national song of India. Written by Bankim Chandra Chatterjee in 1875 and later immortalised in his novel Anandamath, Vande Mataram means “Mother, I bow to thee.” The timeless composition is a heartfelt tribute to the motherland. The performances paid homage to this iconic anthem, reflecting not only its melody but also its enduring message of love, reverence, and unity.

Earlier in the day, the Indian High Commissioner and officials of the High Commission of India also paid tributes to the martyrs of the Indian Peace Keeping Force (IPKF) at the IPKF memorial. Commemorating the Republic Day, a concert, “Timeless Bollywood Melodies: Anuradha Paudwal Live in Sri Lanka,” was organised on 23 January to celebrate the enduring cultural bonds between India and Sri Lanka.

Further, two Indian Coast Guard ships, Varaha and Atulya, arrived in Sri Lanka and will visit Colombo and Galle during their stay during 24-27 January.

On the occasion of the 77th Republic Day of India, a ceremonial reception was organised in the evening at the India House with several dignitaries from all walks of life in Sri Lanka attending.

Consulates General of India in Hambantota and Jaffna and the Assistant High Commission of India in Kandy also observed the 77th Republic Day of India by organising special events.