South Asian University signs landmark MOU with Colombo’s RCSS

The South Asian University (SAU) has signed an MOU with the Regional Centre for Strategic Studies (RCSS), Colombo, in a landmark step towards strengthening regional cooperation, to foster research networks, partnerships and collaborations for transformative change across South Asia.

This is the first agreement SAU has signed with an independent research think tank in Sri Lanka, and is particularly significant given the regional character of both institutions.

A joint release issued by the two parties said the MOU aims to nurture regional consciousness and the idea of ‘Southasianness’ among young minds, facilitate joint research, strengthen capacity-building networks, and promote knowledge exchange and meaningful regional engagement.

Speaking at the virtual launch, SAU President Prof. K.K. Aggarwal described the MOU as an important step in strengthening SAU’s relationship with Sri Lanka. He reaffirmed SAU’s commitment to taking the SAARC mandate forward and exploring campuses across South Asia, particularly in Sri Lanka.

RCSS Executive Director Ambassador Ravinatha Aryasinha highlighted the partnership’s potential for joint research, knowledge exchange, policy dialogue, publications, conferences and opportunities for young scholars.

RCSS Board Member, former Foreign Secretary and SAARC Secretary-General Ambassador Esala Weerakoon recalled that SAU was founded to enhance mutual understanding, challenge assumptions and develop perspectives beyond national boundaries. He noted that the MOU represents a commitment to knowledge, research and dialogue as instruments of regional consciousness.

RCSS Board Member and University of Colombo Professor Emeritus of International Relations and former RCSS Executive Director Prof. Amal Jayawardane highlighted the potential of the two institutions to create a strong platform for collaborative research and regional engagement.

The virtual launch was joined from Delhi by SAU Vice President (Academic) Prof. Kapil Sharma; SAU Vice President (Innovation and Strategy) Prof. Ritu Gaur; SAU Centre for International Collaboration and Outreach Director Prof. Ritu Gupta; SAU Faculty of International Studies Officiating Associate Dean Dr. Medha Bisht; and SAU Centre for International Collaboration and Outreach Project Lead and Deputy Director Dr. Shweta Singh.

From Colombo, the launch was joined by the Board of Directors and staff of the RCSS, including RCSS Research/Program Officer Chamika Wijesuriya, an alumna of SAU. The MOU was facilitated through the active engagement of SAU Department of International Relations Associate Professor (SG) Dr. Shweta Singh, and the outreach efforts of the SAU Centre for International Collaboration and Outreach.

The partnership marks an important step in strengthening the historic, cultural and academic ties between India and Sri Lanka and advancing greater regional cooperation across South Asia.