President says judges’ retirement age extension not aimed at any individual

Colombo, Aug. 12 (Daily Mirror) - President Anura Kumara Dissanayake has stressed that the decision to extend the retirement age of judges was not taken with any individual or group in mind, but in the broader public interest.

The President made the remarks during a meeting with representatives of the Bar Association of Sri Lanka (BASL) at the Presidential Secretariat today (12), where the proposed 22nd Amendment to the Constitution concerning the retirement age of judges was discussed.

The meeting, which lasted nearly an hour, saw BASL representatives present their views and recommendations on the proposed amendment. The President listened to their concerns and outlined the Government’s position, as well as plans to strengthen and improve the country’s judicial system.

President Dissanayake said the administration of justice did not rest solely with the judiciary, but was an integrated process involving investigations, prosecutions and adjudication.

He said the Government was taking steps to strengthen the human resources of the Attorney General’s Department, the Commission to Investigate Allegations of Bribery or Corruption (CIABOC), the Sri Lanka Police and the Government Analyst’s Department.

Plans are also underway to expand CIABOC services to the district level, increase the number of Court of Appeal judges and provide infrastructure to enable the Court of Appeal to conduct proceedings regionally, with the aim of making access to justice more convenient for the public, he said.

The President also highlighted plans to increase the number of High Court judges and improve the physical infrastructure and facilities of courts.

He stressed that the proposed extension of judges’ retirement age was only one component of a broader reform programme aimed at addressing issues across the entire justice system.

The President further said the amendment should not be viewed as reflecting his personal position or that of the Government alone.

BASL representatives said they had no policy objection to increasing the number of judges or extending the retirement age of judges. However, they proposed that the decision to extend the retirement age be reconsidered with a view to reaching a broader consensus.

Minister of Justice and National Integration Harshana Nanayakkara, President’s Legal Adviser Attorney-at-Law J. M. Wijebandara, BASL President Attorney-at-Law Rajeev Amarasuriya and senior BASL representatives attended the meeting.