NIHAL SENEVIRATNE

The clammy hand of death has claimed the life of that gentle, decent, most likable human being, Nihal Seneviratne, known to all and sundry as “Galba”, a nickname he had acquired as a student of Royal Primary School. Even in Sri Lanka’s Parliament, where Galba served as Secretary General for well nigh 15 years, most Ministers, including the late Felix Dias Bandaranaike, and Anura Bandaranaike, called him by his nickname “Galba”. Mrs Bandaranaike and Mr Premadasa however preferred to call him Nihal. The Socialist Minister Dr Colvin R de Silva quite surprisingly always referred to him in the more formal term “Seneviratne”, probably a hang over from the very formal court room practices he was accustomed to.

As Secretary General of Sri Lanka’s Parliament for many years, Galba’s expertise and unparalleled knowledge on parliamentary practices and regulations served as a repository mail to Facebook information and advice to successive governments, Presidents, and Prime Ministers. His advice was sought in the confidence of his absolute political impartiality, regardless of the political philosophy and the governing inclinations of the party in power. I am aware that his advice was sought even when in retirement.

In addition to his family, Galba had two great affections, viz Parliament, and to his old school, Royal College.

Apart from acting with him in a school play “Hiawatha”, I had only a superficial acquaintance with him in school. He having joined Royal Primary a year ahead of me. Galba belonged to the 1945 Group which entered Royal during the final year of Principal E L Bradby’s tenure as principal of Royal College. It was during the years of World War II when the school was temporarily relocated to Turret Road and Form one in the building known as “Carlton Lodge” within the grounds of Turret House in which the upper school was located.

Galba’s classmates included Lal Jayewardene, Sinha Basnayake, Cuda Wijeratne, Nihal Senaratne, Pillo Rustomee, Maurice Koelmeyer, Ged Gooneratne, Dicky Wijeratne, Madduma Kappagoda, Rohan Perera, Nihal Calayanaratne, G C Wickremesinghe, Ranjan Canekeratne, Ian Goonewardene, Geevaka de Soyza, A Vigneswaran, Derrick Andree, Justin Gunawardene, Y D A Senanayake, Ernie Weerasinghe, Balaraman, S J Jafferjee, Lt Col C H Fernando, Keerthi Mendis, Ian de Zilwa, K Thuraisingham, “Bambarey” Samarasinghe, et al, most of whom have also pre deceased him.

In Royal Primary, in his class there were two boys from the UK, James Burt and David Gent, the former’s father Prof Burt was the founding Professor of Zoology in the emerging Ceylon University. Both James and David returned to the UK after their primary education.

Although not inclined to indulge in sports, Galba took on leadership roles in later years at Royal as Editor of the school magazine and serving as a school prefect. He also made an everlasting and very significant contribution as Honorary Secretary of the century old Royal College Union, and later as Vice President for several years.

Galba was never a “nerd” however and displayed trends of mischief that yet engaged boys would delight in. One incident comes to mind. Galba used to travel to school on a push bicycle usually accompanied after school by another classmate heading in the same direction. One afternoon he was cycling along with his friend Madduma Kappagoda, when they passed a home with a large sign, not the usual brass plate on the gate post, which announced to all passers by that the Reverend so and so “resided there”. While passing the house both he and Kappa could not resist the urge to shout in unison “Ado Reverend”. Unfortunately for them the Reverend had been lurking behind a bush waiting for miscreants who had been regularly taunting him. He jumped in front of Galba’s bike and noted the exercise books with his name in the carrier basket in front, and rang the school principal Corea, and complained. Galba was disciplined by Corea.

Galba was a year senior to me at Royal Prep and in Royal College. The difference in one year was enough to socially distance ourselves. In school I only had a “nodding acquaintance” with him. The gap was crossed and bonded after I moved to Australia more than 40 years ago, and residing in the adjoining suburb to which Galba’s sister Iranganie and husband Sena Atukorale moved. Galba was a family oriented person and his bonds with his only sister were strong. His frequent visits to Sydney brought us closer, and I enjoyed his company despite the fact that he was a teetotaller and non smoker, while I was quite the opposite as far as those social practices went. His classmate the late Dr Madduma Kappagoda who became a prominent ophthalmologist in Sydney also lived in the adjoining suburb of Pymble and on Galba’s visits to Sydney it was like a social cyclone hitting our families.

Nihal “Galba” Seneviratne was born in Elpitiya where his father, the late Dr Robert Seneviratne, was District Medical Officer. Apart from his sister Iranganie, he had an older brother K N (Keerthi Nissanka) a tall and burly figure about three years senior to Galba and who was known in school as “Bull”, his nickname. Bull followed in his father’s footsteps and joined the medical profession. Having acquitted himself creditably as a medical student, he chose to follow a teaching career at the Medical College where he was a senior lecturer in the Department of Medicine.

His colleague in the Department was Prof A C E Koch. The Department soon acquired the appellation “the Cock and Bull show”. Sadly, Bull passed away some years ago and his wife from Wales returned to her family of orientation. Galba always admired his elder brother, and unfailingly organized an annual scholarly oration called the “Nissanka Seneviratne Memorial Oration” conducted under the auspices of the Sri Lanka Medical Council.

My image of Bull that has registered in my mind is that of him driving out of their family home on Havelock Road with a cigarette dangling from his lips. I have not seen or met their father, but Galba related the story where he returned home from school one day to be confronted with a pall of gloom. There were a few relatives seated around and the absence of cheer and bon homie was very evident. On making inquiries he realized that his father had passed away earlier that morning.

He had driven his car towards the Fort along Galle Road when he realized the need to pump petrol and had driven into the Walkers Petrol Station on Galle Road Kollupitiya when he had suffered a heart attack and passed away. Galba insisted that his father was a very generous man, and the prevailing price of petrol could not have triggered the heart attack.

Galba and his erstwhile classmate the late Jed Gooneratne, the elder brother of former Minister C V ‘Puggy’ Gooneratne used to tease each other in friendly banter when they met. On one occasion I recall, Galba who held a law degree from Peradeniya and was an enrolled Advocate of the Supreme Court, in a mischievous mood referred to Ged as Proctor and as “people who depend on us advocates”. Pat came Ged’s reply “but you are only a clerk”. That observation was uncanny as the Chief Executive of the House of Representatives which was Galba’s title then, was formerly called the “Clerk to the House”.

With advancing age, my own visits to Sri Lanka have declined in frequency. I did however obtain a seat on a charter flight to Colombo and back to attend the Royal Thomian match of last year 2025. Galba was my constant companion at the match together with other friends like S D de Silva, Ranjit Samarasinghe and Lakshman Kaluarachchi. There too, the sweltering heat in the Mustangs Tent compelled me to excuse myself before the end of the second day’s play, but Galba would have none of it, and insisted on accompanying me out of the grounds. He was almost universally known and recognizable, so we hardly walked a few yards when some friends of his stopped and offered a lift, which was like a gift from heaven for me as I was just visiting under the Colombo sun.

I have to refer to another matter which brings out the essence of Galba’s personality. For some years now I have been contributing articles for a journal published in Australia called “The Ceylankan”. Galba was insisting that those articles deserved a wider readership and should be compiled as a book. Although I agreed with him, my other preoccupations did not allow me the time to get about it. When I visited Sri Lanka last year, he took me to a publisher and introduced me to him, and even wrote a most engaging foreword to the book. Such sincere friends are rare indeed. He went even further and organised a book launch at the DBU Hall and presided at the launch together with our mutual friend Manik de Silva.

The loss of genuine friends have diminished our lives considerably. My heartfelt sympathies go out to his wife Srima, son Satyajit, to whom I owe a debt of gratitude for permitting me to participate in a wonderful enjoyable musical soiree organized by Satyajit and friends at Galba’s home last year, and daughter Shanika and their families. Sri Lanka has lost a legendary figure, and the national psyche considerably affected by the loss of a stalwart of the highest calibre.

Farewell dear Galba. May Nihal Seneviratne attain the Supreme Bliss of Nibbana.

Philatelic Bureau honours Irangani Serasinghe to mark 100 years of Sri Lankan cinema

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.