Tariff, market and geopolitical risks persist, but markets resilient: Fitch

ECONOMYNEXT – Risks for global credit remain negative with significant uncertainties, Fitch Ratings has said, but economic data and capital markets have been notably resilient this year so far.

“Risks for global credit remain biased to the downside with significant uncertainties from a cyclical economic slowdown, a mercurial US tariff policy and persistent geopolitical risks,” Fitch Ratings said.

However, the pause on US tariffs, the resolution to geopolitical conflicts and a continued willingness of US consumers to spend have kept investor risk appetite buoyed and market liquidity high, despite the elevated uncertainty and risk environment, the ratings agency said.

Fitch Ratings-New York-24 July 2025: Risks for global credit remain biased to the downside with significant uncertainties from a cyclical economic slowdown, a mercurial US tariff policy and persistent geopolitical risks, Fitch Ratings says. That said, economic data and capital markets this year have been notably resilient, reflecting optimism about the long-term resolution of key risks as well as the lack of contagion from short-run risk events. Issuer ratings have also shown little downside momentum.

The pause on US tariffs announced in April, the quick resolution to geopolitical conflicts and the continued willingness of US consumers to spend have kept investor risk appetite buoyed and market liquidity high, despite the elevated uncertainty and risk environment. High-yield credit spreads remain historically tight while global equities also performed very well in 1H25.

Nonetheless, signs of potential volatility have crept through. Risk-off sentiment was rapid with a significant unwinding of market valuations and credit spreads following the unexpected breadth and level of US tariff announcements. While valuations have since recovered, the persistent weakness in the US dollar, which fell by about 10% against the euro in 1H25, is pointing to expectations for slowing US growth.

Changes to our sector outlooks at mid-year also point to our worsening expectations for the operating and business environment. Twenty-nine percent of sector and structured finance asset performance outlooks are now ‘deteriorating’, signalling our expectation for worsening conditions in 2025 from just 10% at the beginning of the year.

Our latest quarterly ‘Global Credit Risk Outlook’ (formerly Risk Headquarters) is available at fitchratings.com or by clicking the link above. We updated our Key Risks to reflect changes to the principal risks facing global credit. We added Key Risks for ‘Trade and Tariff Volatility’, ‘Governance and Policy’ and ‘Geopolitics’, while retaining the existing risk for ‘Capital Market and Funding Instability’.