Epic Lanka joins premier  Asian banks and fintechs  at World Financial Innovation Series in Indonesia

Epic Lanka team at the World Financial Innovation Series in Jakarta, Indonesia

Epic Lanka, recently attended the World Financial Innovation Series – Indonesia’s foremost financial sector event in Jakarta, Indonesia.

The event comprising over 1,000 participants provided Epic a platform to demonstrate its comprehensive suite of fintech solutions, including advanced card payment systems, authentication technologies, payment security measures, business process automation, and dynamic workflow solutions.

The World Financial Innovation Series (WFIS) Indonesia is an annual financial sector event that powers a meeting of FSI leaders, financial experts, technology moguls and government regulators to discuss and analyse the prevailing state of developments concerning the country’s financial realm.

Under the theme “Accelerating Indonesia’s Financial Revolution”, the event witnessed many technology and business heads, top C-suite professionals, senior executives, key decision makers and many more crucial profiles from the largest banks, insurance companies and micro-finance institutions across Asia.

Epic has previous experience developing solutions for banks and financial institutions in Asia. With a reputation for transforming the banking landscape in Malaysia with its revolutionary Branchless Banker solution and for introducing revolutionary grassroots fintech solutions to the Singapore banking sector, WFIS allowed the Epic team to enhance and extend its footprint in East Asia. The company’s 20 cutting-edge products are developed to serve multiple areas of the fintech ecosystem such as debt collection, customer relationship management, network access control, mobile banking, omnichannel digital communication, and customer onboarding.

Epic Lanka Managing Director and CEO Viraj Mudalige said: “Epic’s reputation as an innovative software company is recognised not just in Sri Lanka, but also in East Asia. Over the past 26 years, we have transformed into a dynamic product solutions company and are aggressively expanding our footprint across Asia and the APAC region.”

“The World Financial Innovation Series in Jakarta has provided us with a unique platform to interact with the top decision-makers from leading banks and share knowledge. East Asia has captured the spotlight of the fintech world. The quality and sophistication level of products and solutions developed here is world-class. We hope to promote our cutting-edge solutions to international companies to match our success in Sri Lanka in East Asia and be on par with IT giants in Asia.”