Djokovic wins five-set epic to set up Sinner semi-final

July.08 - Novak Djokovic produced an astonishing performance to beat Felix Auger-Aliassime in a five-set thriller lasting over five hours to set up a blockbuster Wimbledon semi-final against defending champion Jannik Sinner.

Bidding for a record 25th Grand Slam title, having been tied with Margaret Court since the 2023 US Open, it seemed like Djokovic's latest bid was on the brink when he pulled up with a leg injury in the first set.

But a medical time-out and a massage appeared to solve the problem and the 39-year-old was still fighting hard four sets later against fourth seed Auger-Aliassime.

After entertaining a packed Centre Court for five hours and 15 minutes, it was Djokovic who stood with his arms aloft in triumph after a 7-6 (12-10) 3-6 6-3 6-7 (4-7) 7-6 (10-4) victory.

"I won that match with a racquet and a lot of heart," an exhausted Djokovic said.

"What can I say? These are the kind of moments I still play tennis for.

"I wish it was the final so I don't need to worry about how the body will feel tomorrow, but I'm happy that I won."

Djokovic is now, once again, two wins away from claiming the standalone record for the most Grand Slam singles titles in history.

World number one Sinner, who defeated Jan-Lennard Struff earlier on Tuesday, will be hoping to derail the Serb's efforts in a repeat of last year's semi-final.

The Italian dismissed Djokovic effortlessly on Centre Court 12 months ago - a defeat that left the seven-time Wimbledon champion lamenting his age.

"I don't think it's bad fortune. It's just age, the wear and tear of the body," he said at the time.

But Djokovic, who claimed revenge on Sinner in the semi-finals of January's Australian Open, showed on Tuesday why he remains a Grand Slam contender by overcoming a man 14-years his junior in the toughest of durability tests.

After coming through the longest match of his career at Wimbledon, Djokovic stood with his arms aloft, soaking in the applause, before doing a dance routine in tribute to his daughter. - BBC