Sri Lanka speaker claims MPs who signed NCM urged him to take over

ECONOMYNEXT — Speaker of Parliament Mahinda Yapa Abeywardena who survived a no confidence motion against him claimed that MPs among those who signed the motion had tried to unconstitutionally appoint him Sri Lanka president in 2022.

Addressing parliament on Thursday March 21 after the Sri Lanka Podujana Peramuna (SLPP) government comfortably defeated the no confidence motion (NCM), Abeywardena said “powerful forces” had urged him to take over the presidency after it became vacant following former president Gotabaya Rajapaksa’s resignation after months of intense public protests.

The latest NCM, filed by the main opposition Samagi Jana Balawegaya (SJB), was the fifth against a sitting speaker in parliament’s history, but the first on the grounds of an alleged violation of the constitution, said Abeywardena.

“Personally, I believe I have acted according to the constitution and to my conscience,” he said, adding that, in fact, he was asked to violate the constitution in 2022 during the Aragalaya youth-led street protests.

“During the Aragalaya in 2022, I got frequent phone calls urging me to take over the government even in violation of the constitution. I was surprised to see that those who had tried to influence me to do this have signed this NCM,” he said.

Abeywardena claimed that he had maintained his silence all this time as a “responsible speaker” but is now compelled to reveal all.

“There were powerful elements that tried to influence me to establish a government. Their intention was not to calm the situation or protect the country but to establish an illegal government through me and turn our country into a Libya or Afghanistan,” he claimed.

“There were also attempts to achieve some objectives that could not be achieved over the past 30 years,” he added, ostensibly referring to a violent overthrow of the government.

Abeywardena said he had unequivocally rejected invitations, both local and international, to step into the presidency upon Rajapaksa’s resignation. He claimed that he had stressed to these parties that his fervent desire was to “uphold the supreme constitution”.

“When it was evident that my mind could not be changed, some of them became violent and surrounded my house and threatened my life. I’m devastated to this day that among those were Buddhist monks and clergymen of other faiths,” he said.

Amid these threats to his life, claimed Abeywardena, President Rajapaksa had contacted him to obtain his views on transferring power to him. However, given the lack of provisions in the constitution that would empower the speaker of parliament to serve as president without a prime minister and a cabinet could’ve meant a state of anarchy with regional leaders emerging all over the country, a risk he well understood, said Abeywardena.

“On July 13 at the last parliamentary leaders’ meeting, there was a dangerous situation brewing around parliament with some groups coming very close to destroying it. Party leaders had left and I alone stayed in this building until the last moment,” he said.

“Fortunately, I was able to prevent a great disaster. If it weren’t for that, there might not be none of you to present this NCM, or me to face it, or this place to take it up,” he added.

Abeywardena also argued that, since taking office as Speaker in 2020, he had increased the time allocated for opposition members to 40 percent of parliament time, to the chagrin of the government side.

“But some opposition members complained to me in my office that this increased time was not evenly distributed among them with some leaders taking up most of it,” he claimed.

The speaker also rejected allegations that President Ranil Wickremesinghe was exerting influence on him in his duties.

“Some say the head of state is influencing me. It is true that the president is an old friend, but since he beacme president, he has not once not tried to influence me,” he said.

Abeywardene claimed to bemoan MPs who are sworn to serve the interests of a public burdened by taxes and high cost of living taking up three days of parliament’s time at a cost of nearly 45 million rupees for the NCM against him.

“This is not something a country like hours can afford,” he said.

He also claimed that some MPs who had signed the no faith motion had privately expressed their regret to him about being compelled to sign it.

Given the recent trend of all 225 parliamentarians routinely accused of being thieves, Abeywardena said he was glad that this was one allegation no one who signed the NCM levelled at him.

“All of you who supported me and those of you who harshly criticised me during this debate, my door remains open to you all,” he said. (Colombo/Mar22/2024)