Akram Cassim takes helm as President of Sri Lanka Gem and Jewellery Association

The SLGJA Committee for 2024/25, ready to steer the industry towards a promising future

With deep appreciation, Akram Cassim honors Ajward Deen for his outstanding service as SLGJA President

Calls for urgent policy reforms and promotion of a Sapphire experience

Akram Cassim unveils his vision for a dynamic and innovative future for SLGJA

At the Annual General Meeting of the Sri Lanka Gem and Jewellery Association (SLGJA), Akram Cassim, a longstanding member of the industry, was officially announced as the newly elected President. In a speech that was both forward-looking and deeply appreciative of Sri Lanka’s gem and jewellery heritage, Cassim outlined his vision to drive the industry forward, tackle challenges collectively, and capitalise on the unique legacy of the Ceylon Sapphire.

“It is both a pleasure and privilege to serve you all in an industry that I have cherished throughout my life,” Cassim began, expressing his gratitude to the members of SLGJA for entrusting him with the role of President. Acknowledging that the challenges ahead are many, he called for unity across all facets of the gem and jewellery trade to address shared issues and improve the industry’s outlook. He emphasised that all segments of the trade—from Ratnapura, the heart of gem mining, to the gem trading hubs of Beruwela and the gold and jewellery craftsmanship found in Kandy and Sea Street—need to collaborate to strengthen the sector’s overall growth.

Cassim highlighted the enormous potential of Sri Lanka’s gem and jewellery industry to become a significant foreign exchange earner for the country and a generator of employment across the island. He drew attention to urgent policy reforms required to reverse the changes that have hindered growth, weakened global competitiveness, and led businesses to consider moving operations abroad. “If we can have urgent reforms and reverse policies that have impacted our industry negatively, we can create a business-friendly environment that will allow our trade to flourish,” he noted. Cassim expressed a firm commitment to work closely with the new government and other authorities to foster a business climate conducive to the growth of this vital sector.

A pivotal aspect of Cassim’s speech was the integration of the gem and jewellery industry with the booming tourism sector. He proposed strategic partnerships with Sri Lanka Tourism and SriLankan Airlines to enhance the experience of every tourist visiting the island, presenting a unique opportunity to position the country as a premier destination for gemstone shopping and cultural experiences. “Let’s create an amazing Sapphire Experience for tourists visiting this island,” Cassim proposed, stressing the unparalleled opportunity to capitalise on the country’s rich heritage as a source of the world’s finest blue sapphires.

Over the past 2,500 years, Sri Lanka has supplied some of the most exquisite blue sapphires seen, worn, and displayed around the world. Cassim emphasised that the country remains one of the best sources globally for fine sapphires and more than 50 varieties of coloured gemstones. By promoting the “mystery, magic, myths, and legends” along with the “history, crafts, and skills” of Sri Lanka’s gem and jewellery legacy, the industry could create a compelling narrative to showcase to the world.

The association envisions creating a comprehensive “Sapphire Shopping Experience” for tourists, enticing them to own a piece of Sri Lanka’s rich heritage. By romanticising the Ceylon Sapphire, Cassim believes that every aspect of the industry can be promoted, from the miners of Ratnapura to the gem cutters and traders of Beruwela, the gold and silver craftsmen of Kandy, the historic silversmiths of Galle, and the jewellery boutiques of Colombo.

Cassim thanked the outgoing President, Ajward Deen, for his outstanding leadership over the past three years, recognising his vast experience and dedication. He also praised the outgoing committee for their hard work. Looking ahead, Cassim is optimistic about working with the newly formed SLGJA board which has a blend of experience and youth:

He believes this mix will inspire new ideas and innovation to propel the industry forward. Cassim concluded his speech by thanking all members for their support and encouraging everyone to work together to make the year ahead successful.

With over 37 years of experience Akram Cassim heads Colombo Jewellery Stores (CJS), a historic jewellery house founded in 1922. Having recently celebrated its centennial milestone, CJS has upheld its century-old tradition of excellence while continuing to innovate and set trends in the Sri Lankan jewellery industry His deep understanding of the trade and his passion for its growth add great value to his leadership role at SLGJA. Cassim is also deeply passionate about wildlife and conservation. He has actively engaged in community service as a Rotarian with the Rotary Club of Colombo. He is also involved with several other social service organisations dedicated to uplifting communities and supporting social causes across Sri Lanka.

The Sri Lanka Gem and Jewellery Association (SLGJA) is the apex body representing the gem and jewellery trade in Sri Lanka. Its mission is to unify all segments of the industry and work towards fostering growth, innovation, and global competitiveness.