El Nino: Govt braces for any shortfall in essential food supplies

Colombo, Sep. 14 (Daily Mirror) - In the event of fears that El Nino weather phenomenon will trigger a shortfall in imported essential supplies, the government has worked out an action plan to explore alternate markets , a Minister said.

Sri Lanka is almost self sufficient in rice which is the staple. Based of El Nino related weather forecasts , the agriculture authorities have decided to advance the next cultivation season to save on irrigation water and use rainwater to the maximum for the growth of plants.

However, a number of essential commodities are imported. Among them are lentils including dhal, sugar, canned fish, potatoes , big onion, wheat flour , dry chili and some spice varieties.

Environment Minister Dammika Patabendi who heads the special Cabinet Subcommittee and the Officials’ Committee in this regard told Daily Mirror that any shortfall in essential supplies would not occur during the remainder of the year.

However, he said an action plan had been prepared for any eventuality next year.

"I met my Indian counterpart on the sidelines of an international event in Mongolia. At the moment, there is no issue in India where we import our food items mostly from. We look at alternate markets in case any shortage happens due to weather -related reasons next year. We will also look at substitutes too," he said.

Sri Lanka imports dhal from Australia and Canada depending crop seasons .

A spokesman for the Essential Food Commodities Importers' and Traders' Association confirmed that no issue would arise this year.

However, he also said nothing could be predicted at the moment for the future because of adverse weather conditions expected.

He said prices of essential items had increased in the world market .

For example , he said that sugar price had increased by US$ 120-150 a tonne .

"Dhal is available in Australia and Canada," he said.He also requested the government to lift the ban on canned fish imports.