HNBA Continues Dominance as Best Life Bancassurance Provider for Fourth Consecutive Year

HNB Assurance PLC (HNBA) has once again secured the prestigious title of “Best Life Bancassurance Provider in Sri Lanka” for the fourth consecutive year, recognized by the Global Banking and Finance Review. This award underscores HNBA’s strong partnerships and commitment to excellence while maintaining its dominant position within the industry.

Mr. Lasitha Wimalaratne, Chief Executive Officer of HNBA, stating, “It is indeed an immense honor to be acknowledged as the Best Life Bancassurance provider in the country by the esteemed Global Banking and Finance Review – UK, marking our fourth consecutive win. This achievement truly is a testament to the dedication and collaboration of our teams, who continuously push boundaries, foster partnerships and redefine industry benchmarks.”

He further emphasized the significance of HNBA’s Partnership Channel in their business operations, “As we strive towards our goal to attain 10% market share the partnership channel has a crucial role to play. I’m extremely proud of our team for this achievement and I’m certain we will continue to push boundaries and reach even greater heights.”

“We’re thrilled by HNBA’s achievement of being the Best Life Bancassurance Provider in Sri Lanka for the fourth consecutive year and are committed to ensuring that our partnership grows even further. By leveraging our strengths as a Group, we are consistently exploring ways to keep delivering top-notch solutions to our customers. My congratulations to HNBA and all the teams involved in this impressive achievement”, opined, Mr. Supun Dias, Assistant General Manager – Network Management at Hatton National Bank.

Mr. Sanesh Fernando, Chief Business Officer – Partnerships at HNBA, reflected on the significance of this achievement, stating, “Without a doubt, this achievement stands as a testament to the collaborative efforts of the entire Partnership Team, for which I extend my deepest gratitude. A special mention goes out to the management of Hatton National Bank and all our other banking partners for their continued support.

To receive this prestigious recognition for the fourth-year running is a clear indication of our relentless commitment to excellence and the efforts made by our team. I’m confident that moving forward, we as a team are committed to delivering exceptional value to our customers collectively contributing to the larger vision of HNBA.”

Dialog Axiata Recognised as the Largest FDI Contributor by BOI

HNB Assurance Crowned “Best Life Insurance Company in Sri Lanka” by ICC

HNB Assurance Group completes impressive third quarter with 21% growth in GWP.

HNB Assurance PLC Annual Report of bags “Best of Sri Lanka” Award at the World’s Largest Annual Report Competition

HNBA and HNBGI Celebrate Insurance Month with a Renewed Pledge to Protect

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.