Sri Lanka consumers lack awareness, laws alone not enough: CAA

ECONOMYNEXT – Sri Lanka’s consumers should be more aware and vigilant when purchasing goods through online platforms and e-marketing methods, the Consumer Affairs Authority has said.

“There can be any number of laws in the country but it will be useless if consumers aren’t aware of the legal recourse,” Janaka Prasad, Assistant Director of the Consumer Affairs Authority said.

The methods of consumers purchasing goods and services have evolving faster than a country can enact laws, Prasad told reporters Friday, adding that this was a global challenge.

“The consumer plays and important role in navigating a fast evolving marketplace.”

“We have a literacy rate of 90-95 percent, but this is not enough. The ability to read is not sufficient. Consumers have to be able to comprehend. That cognizance is lacking in Sri Lankan consumers when you compare with the rest of the world.”

Sri Lanka’s consumers must make sure to protect their money. “Most of the complaints we receive are not about essential items. People scrolling on their phones decide impulsively that they want to buy something.”

“Consumers have to do due diligence of what they buy, consider the specifications, the country of manufacture, the product’s history, read reviews (of course some companies pay for reviews), so consumers must consider all of this.”

Laws are enacted over time in response to various challenges presented at various times, the CAA official pointed out. “We cannot change the law daily or weekly in pace with the changing marketplace.

“If you look at the 19th and 20th centuries the pace of change was slow. But in the last 20 years alone things have changed drastically. A phone you buy today could be outdated in a week. 20 years ago a tv would last you some time, but now LED and LCD tvs don’t last that long.

“Quality, durability and technological use of goods have evolved. So consumer demand must be aware of these, factor in these considerations.”

The CAA receives a lot of complaints Prasad said. “There are actions we can take within the legal framework we have now. But we have to amend and bring the law up-to-date with the changes in the online purchasing, then we can ensure a far safer online marketplace.”

“We have to develop consumer awareness. Only then we can reduce this problem.” (Colombo/May17/2024)