Mission to free children from harmful prejudices: Sri Lanka president

ECONOMYNEXT – The new government’s mission is to free children from harmful prejudices and social effects, Sri Lanka President Anura Kumara Dissanayake said in a World Children’s Day message.

“Our mission in this renaissance era is to free children from harmful prejudices and social effects, and the pressures of exam-focused education, which hinder their psychosocial development,” a statement by the president’s media division read.

To achieve this, the government will promote economic freedom, Dissanayake said.

Sri Lanka marks World Children’s Day on October 1. The rest of the world marks it on November 20.

Globally, October 1 is International Day for Older Persons. There was no presidential message issued to mark this. The current president’s party campaigned on an ageist platform pandering to younger voters and disparaging older politicians.

Let’s dedicate ourselves to creating a better world for them.

We have identified several significant challenges facing today’s children, including poverty, malnutrition, inadequate health and sanitation, environmental degradation, educational disparities, social inequalities, and the risks associated with substance abuse and technology misuse.

Our mission in this renaissance era is to free children from harmful prejudices and social effects, and the pressures of exam-focused education, which hinder their psychosocial development. We aim to reclaim the joyful, carefree childhood that every child deserves.

By nurturing a generation of children who are healthy both in mind and spirit, we can foster compassionate, independent, and imaginative individuals who will shape a better future.

To achieve this, we are committed to promoting economic freedom, fostering human kindness, building mutual trust, and encouraging respect and acceptance within society. Additionally, we prioritize the protection of our rich environmental heritage and advocate for necessary political transformation.