Sri Lanka Insurance Corporation General Limited honoured

Sri Lanka Insurance Corporation General Limited (SLICGL), the nation’s trusted leader in general insurance, has been recognised as Sri Lanka’s No. 1 Most Loved General Insurance Brand in 2026.

The prestigious honour, awarded by LMD – The Voice of Business, demonstrates the deep trust, confidence, and lasting relationships customers continue to place in SLICGL. It is clear evidence of the company’s continued commitment to service excellence, innovation, and reliability in protecting lives and businesses throughout the country.

As SLICGL continues to command the industry, it remains dedicated to protecting lives, supporting communities, and delivering trusted insurance solutions nationwide. The achievement also celebrates the dedication of employees, sales teams, business partners, and stakeholders whose collective efforts have strengthened the brand and nurtured long‑term customer relationships.

The recognition reinforces SLICGL’s position as the country’s leading force in the insurance sector, motivating the organisation to enhance products, services, and customer experiences, maintaining the highest standards for all touchpoints.

Today, the bond thrives on consistent delivery. SLICGL remains the undisputed market leader in Sri Lanka’s general insurance industry, with a 20.2% market share and a Gross Written Premium of Rs. 30.3 billion in 2025. During the year, the company settled Rs. 12.3 billion in insurance claims and benefits, including in the aftermath of Cyclone Ditwah, standing by policyholders when it mattered most. Its motor solutions arm, Motor Plus, retained its place as the country’s number one motor insurer.

Climate resilience now central to Sri Lanka’s economic future, investors told

IDL reopens renovated MOH office, Kaduwela, in a gesture of community commitment

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.