Punishment in hellholes

The latest bout of prison violence has brought the appalling conditions of Sri Lanka’s prisons to light once again. Whenever riots erupt in prisons and lives are lost, issues such as prison congestion, squalor, etc., attract the attention of legislators and other policymakers, but hardly any remedial action is taken, and no wonder the status quo remains. Governments only pay lip service to prison reforms, which have become mere political slogans.

Over the past few days, many members of Parliament have been shedding copious tears for the victims of the Negombo prison violence, which claimed about 28 lives, including those of seven officers, but sadly nothing comes of their so-called discussions and debates. Cynics say Sri Lanka has a NATO (No-Action-Talk-Only) parliament, where its members talk the talk, but seldom walk the walk. They ought to sink their political differences and find ways and means of improving the conditions of prisons, which are widely considered hellholes. Haphazard prison reforms won’t do.

Meanwhile, as for remand prisons, there is a crucial issue that needs to be addressed urgently. Even a brief stay in a Sri Lankan remand prison is tantamount to punishment in itself before conviction, as is public knowledge. Suspects are so vulnerable in prisons that they even run the risk of being beaten to death, as we saw the other day in Negombo. Successive governments have abused the PTA (Prevention of Terrorism Act), the Offences against Public Property Act, etc., to have suspects arrested and remanded for prolonged periods.

Many people languish in remand prisons due to politically motivated arrests and selective enforcement that the police have earned notoriety for. The police ought to conduct thorough investigations and gather credible evidence before moving to arrest suspects who are not hardcore criminals posing a danger to society. It defies comprehension why so many suspects are arrested and kept in remand prisons for months on end even when there is no reason to suspect that they will flee the country, interfere with witnesses, suppress evidence, commit further serious offences, or pose a significant danger to the public.

Pretrial arrests, remand or detention should be the exception and not the rule, especially in a country like Sri Lanka, which cannot even ensure the safety of convicts and remand prisoners. The police make arrests swiftly and thereafter drag their feet on investigations while objecting to bail for suspects. Most suspects who are arrested and remanded in this manner are political opponents of the governments in power. There have been numerous such cases during the past several decades. Ruling party politicians use arrests to vilify their opponents and gain political mileage. They abuse their parliamentary privileges to defame suspects in custody and hold social media kangaroo trials with impunity. They apparently presume suspects guilty until proven innocent. When they do so, the police cannot be expected to conduct impartial investigations; the police dare not do anything that might cause the ruling party politicians to lose face. It is no surprise that the police have been accused of fabricating evidence against suspects who have incurred the wrath of ruling party politicians.

Holding a person on remand indefinitely until the conclusion of investigations is not consistent with due process and international best practices. The rule of law demands that the police or other investigators establish reasonable grounds to suspect an offence, collect and preserve evidence, interview witnesses, question suspects and assess the facts objectively before depriving anyone of personal liberty. They must not act according to their whims and fancies or at the behest of their political masters.

Premature arrests risk wrongful detention, reputational damage, hardships and expensive legal challenges for suspects. They could also compromise public confidence in law enforcement and lead to perceptions that investigations are influenced by political pressure or public sentiment rather than facts. When the rule of law is undermined, the justice system becomes weak.

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.