BOC gearing up for ‘Spirit Awards 2023’ to recognise excellence of its staff

The Bank of Ceylon (BOC) is gearing up for its annual ‘Spirit Awards 2023,’ scheduled for 21st July 2024. This prestigious event is designed to recognize the outstanding contributions of BOC’s branch network, showcasing the bank’s commitment to delivering exceptional service to its customers.

The primary goal of the ‘Spirit Awards 2023’ is to honor the dedication, achievement and excellence of BOC’s staff, which have been pivotal to the bank’s success as Sri Lanka’s leading financial institution. The event will recognize top-performing branches, highlight achievements in distinct banking segments, and commend those who have excelled in workplace organization and efficiency. Additionally, it will acknowledge branches and departments that have effectively utilized digital tools and technologies to enhance customer service and operational efficiency.

The Spirit Awards 2023 will be held with the participation of the Board of Directors, Corporate and Executive Management, Provincial Management, Branch Managers and staff from the winning branches. The event is organized by the Branch Operations department, under the leadership of Deputy General Manager – Branch Operations Mr. Priyal Silva. The careful planning and execution by this team with other supportive departments, ensure that the event not only celebrates achievements but also inspires staff to continue striving for excellence.

Although the ‘Spirit Awards 2023’ is an internal event, it emphasizes BOC’s dedication to fostering a culture of excellence and achievement. By recognizing the hard work and accomplishments of its staff, the bank aims to continually enhance the service it provides to its customers, reinforcing its position as the No. 1 bank in Sri Lanka.

Special highlights of this event will be telecasted on selected electronic media and articles covering the event will appear in printed media, allowing the broader public witness and appreciate the achievements celebrated at the Sprit Awards 2023.

Scope Cinemas brings IMAX®️ to Sri Lanka sparking cinematic revolution

SLIC General and RDB forge Bancassurance partnership for seamless insurance access

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.