Brandix redefining the strategic pillars of its Smart Factory journey

One of Sri Lanka’s leading proponents of technology solutions in manufacturing, Brandix, took stock of its transformative journey and discussed new innovative solutions to propel the business forward at the ‘Digital Horizon 2024’, the second edition of Brandix’s own digital keynote session held at Trace Expert City in Colombo.

The event highlighted the significant progress made across the organization over the past two years, showcasing several innovative advancements. A key focus was on the integration of AI, automation, and value addition in Brandix’s Smart Factory journey. These Smart Factories exemplify the synergy between efficiency and empathy, offering numerous benefits such as reducing physical exertion and fatigue for employees, enhancing workplace safety, and fostering inclusivity by enabling individuals with disabilities to join the workforce. Leveraging the Internet of Things (IoT) and automation, Brandix has also achieved greater resource efficiency, reduced waste, and minimized its ecological footprint, underscoring its commitment to sustainability.

Brandix was also among the first Sri Lankan companies to adopt Copilot for Microsoft 365, the software solution provider’s cutting-edge artificial intelligence assistance platform, having been invited to join the Global Early Access Program.

Digital Horizon 2024 also discussed the development and deployment of several other AI-led programs that have been instrumental in driving the company’s digital transformation journey. Oshada Senanayake, Director and Chief Operating Officer for Digital Transformation at Brandix, said “A lot has changed in the sphere of apparel manufacturing; it is no longer the mere traditional cut-and-sew operation that many perceive it to be. Our Associates on the shop floor employ some of the most modern technologies that have completely changed their quality of work, whilst driving greater learning and technology adoption across the group and the communities we serve. Engaging with some of the biggest names in the technology domain, Brandix is also proud of its in-house talent and innovators who constantly challenge and advance the way we do business. The Horizon platform has been an ideal platform to discuss and take these conversations forward.”

CCI calls for 16-point policy plan for growth of construction industry

Sri Lankan gempreneurs in international spotlight at FACETS Sri Lanka 2025

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.