Israel rejects Hamas’ ceasefire offer, vows to press on with Gaza City offensive

Israel on Wednesday rejected Hamas’ proposal for reaching a comprehensive ceasefire deal in Gaza to end the war, saying its army will continue to prepare for a major attack on Gaza City.

In a press statement released on Wednesday, Hamas reiterated its willingness to reach a “comprehensive deal” under which Israeli hostages in Gaza would be released in exchange for an agreed number of Palestinian prisoners held in Israel.

According to Hamas, the deal would also include a permanent ceasefire, the withdrawal of Israeli forces from Gaza, the reopening of border crossings to allow the delivery of humanitarian aid and essential supplies, and the start of reconstruction efforts.

Hamas also voiced support for the establishment of an independent national administration composed of technocrats to take immediate responsibility for managing Gaza’s civil affairs.

In response, Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu dismissed the statement as “a spin.”

In a statement issued by his office, Netanyahu said Israel would agree to end the war only if Hamas accepts full Israeli security control over the Gaza Strip, the demilitarization of Hamas and Gaza, the establishment of a non-Palestinian administration, and the release of all hostages.

Israeli Defense Minister Israel Katz also rejected the Hamas offer, saying the army is continuing preparations “at full strength” to seize Gaza City.

Katz warned that Hamas will “soon understand that it must choose between two options: accepting Israel’s terms to end the war -- first and foremost the release of all hostages and disarmament -- or seeing Gaza reduced to the fate of Rafah and Beit Hanoun.”

After Hamas accepted a Qatar-brokered proposal last month, Israel neither responded nor submitted it for cabinet approval. Last week, Netanyahu said Israel would consider a comprehensive deal, but he also indicated that such an agreement could not be finalized in the near term.

Israel’s nearly two-year offensive has left the Palestinian enclave in ruins and caused widespread famine. According to health authorities in Gaza, at least 63,746 people have been killed by Israeli strikes and gunfire since October 2023.