First Capital celebrates double wins at SLIM Brand Excellence Awards

First Capital Holdings PLC, the pioneering investment institution, has achieved a significant milestone by clinching two prestigious awards at the SLIM Brand Excellence Awards 2023, marking its debut at the award ceremony. The company’s outstanding brand performance in the capital market sector was recognized in the B2B Brand of the Year category, earning the Silver award, and the Turnaround Brand of the Year category, earning the Bronze award.

The SLIM Brand Excellence Awards is a distinguished platform that recognizes outstanding achievements in brand excellence at the highest level in the country. It celebrates exceptional efforts, strategies and remarkable brand stories, encouraging performance, and enhancing brand equity while inspiring marketers to reach international standards.

First Capital’s success in securing both the B2B Brand of the Year – Silver and Turnaround Brand of the Year – Bronze awards was a recognition of their agile thinking, strategic prowess, capital market expertise, and research-backed decision-making process. Furthermore, their remarkable financial performance amid challenging macro-economic conditions has showcased First Capital’s resilience and industry savviness, ensuring profitability while exceeding customer expectations. The company’s ability to turn around its financial performance and achieve its highest-ever profits within the financial year, coupled with its pivotal role in not only pursuing business motives but also contributing significantly to the economic turnaround of the country, has been duly noted in the rigorous evaluation process conducted by SLIM.

Gamika de Silva, Group Chief Marketing Officer of Janashakthi Group, shared his insights on company’s accomplishments, stating, “Over the course of First Capital’s distinguished four-decade legacy, the commitment to performance has been evident. With strong leadership and an extensive team of professionals, First Capital has been dedicated to bringing value to its stakeholders. However, this dedication goes beyond strategies for consistent growth and enduring success; it involves shaping the First Capital brand to embody shared values and collective efforts, creating a powerful brand with a national purpose. This marks only the beginning of a journey filled with many more milestones.”

Global reputation expert to speak on vital topic for corporate and political leaders

Net foreign outflows within first 15 days of New Year hit Rs. 1 billion

First Capital reports ‘impressive financial performance’ with profits soaring to Rs. 2.81 billion

Jaffna business community ‘enthusiastic’ about investment banking products and services

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.