‘Sri Lanka’s first AI-powered digital trainer for Banca partners’

HNB Assurance PLC recently introduced NAVI, The Digital Trainer, a new AI-powered training companion designed to support its banca staff with instant, reliable access to knowledge, whenever they need it. The solution was unveiled at Partnership Life, the company’s annual forum dedicated to celebrating the performance of its Partnership Channel.

Built to make learning simpler and more accessible, NAVI is a voice-enabled AI chatbot that helps banca staff quickly find product information, policy details, and process-related guidance by drawing from a centralized knowledge bank. Whether on the go or at the point of customer interaction, NAVI ensures that answers are never out of reach.

Sharing his thoughts, Sanesh Fernando, Chief Business Officer / GM – Partnership Channel at HNB Assurance, opined, “With NAVI, our intention is to make learning a part of everyday conversations. By combining chat and voice capabilities, we are making it easier for our officers to learn on demand and perform with greater confidence.” He further noted that it is this continuous focus on meaningful innovation that has consistently set HNB Assurance apart within the bancassurance space. “Solutions like NAVI reflect the way we think and operate as a Partnership Channel. This commitment to enabling our partners and bancassurance officers through practical, forward-thinking initiatives has been a key driver in our journey, one that has seen us being recognized as the Best Life Bancassurance Provider for five consecutive years, while also delivering strong and sustained growth year after year.”

Commenting on the launch, Suneth Jayamanne, Chief Information Officer / GM of HNB Assurance, said, “We see NAVI as a support system rather than a piece of technology. Our Bancassurance officers operate in fast-paced environments and having instant access to the right information can make all the difference. NAVI is about helping our people feel more prepared, more confident, and more connected to the knowledge they need to serve customers better.”

The launch of NAVI was marked by an engaging reveal featuring an AI-generated avatar that introduced the digital trainer and its capabilities, symbolizing a shift towards a more intuitive and people-friendly approach to learning.

As HNB Assurance continues to expand its Partnership Channel, innovations such as NAVI highlights the company’s focus on building strong, well-supported partnerships, blending technology with a deep understanding of how people learn, and work.

HNB Assurance PLC (HNBA) is one of the fastest growing Insurance Companies in Sri Lanka with a network of 79 branches. HNBA is a Life Insurance company with a rating of ‘A’ (lka) by Fitch Ratings Lanka for ‘National Insurer Financial Strength Rating’. Following the introduction of the segregation rules by the Insurance Regulator, HNB General Insurance Limited (HNBGI) was created and commenced its operations in January 2015; HNBGI continues to specialize in motor, non-motor and Takaful insurance solutions and is a fully owned subsidiary of HNB Assurance PLC. HNB General Insurance has been assigned a ‘National Insurer Financial Strength Rating’ of ‘A’ (lka) by Fitch Ratings Lanka Limited. HNBA is rated within the Top 100 brands and Top 100 companies in Sri Lanka by LMD and HNB Assurance has won international awards for Brand Excellence, Digital Marketing and HR Excellence including the Great Place To Work® Certification, and won many awards for its Annual Reports at award ceremonies organized by the Institute of Chartered Accountants of Sri Lanka.

Automobile Association of Ceylon donates towards Disaster Relief Support Fund

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.