Chinese Communist Party representatives meet AKD

Several representatives of the Chinese Communist Party including the Vice Minister of the International Department Sun Haiyan met with Janatha Vimukthi Peramuna (JVP) led National People’s Power (NPP) party leader Anura Kumara Dissanayake at the JVP head office in Pelawatta yesterday.

The delegation included the Deputy Director General of the International Affairs Department Lin Tao, Counsellor of the Chinese Embassy in Sri Lanka Chen Xiangyuan, Director of the international Affairs Department Li Jiyan, Deputy Director Wen Jun, Secretary to the Deputy Minister Jin Yan and the Third Secretary of the Chinese Embassy in Sri Lanka Jin Enze.

The NPP was represented by NPP Executive Council members Vijitha Herath, Dr Harini Amarasuriya, Prof Anil Jayantha Fernando and Sunil Handunetti.

In a statement the NPP said the two parties discussed Sri Lanka’s current political situation, the upcoming polls and ensuing events.

“The leaders of the NPP emphasised the significance of establishing political stability in the country to navigate through the current crisis. They also discussed the party’s readiness for an election, along with the anticipated measures and strategies to be implemented for it,” it said.

“The Chinese delegation highlighted the measures and organisational structures implemented by the NPP in the political arena to enhance its popularity and appeal. In turn, the leaders of the NPP emphasised to the Chinese delegation their relations with various social groups, strata, and Sri Lankans residing overseas. They also discussed the party’s policies for national development and the importance of dialogue between party structures and the public,” it added.

The party asserted that mutual trust, socio-cultural relations, and diplomatic ties with the Chinese Communist Party could be utilised under an NPP Government. They further delved into discussions on how these relations could be leveraged for economic development during the meeting. Sun Haiyan is currently on a two-day official visit to Sri Lanka.