Home Lands unveils ‘Central Park Boulevard Port City’ twin tower high-rise

Market leader Home Lands revealed the name of its latest most iconic twin tower high-rise development project in the Central Park district of Port City Colombo, “Central Park Boulevard Port City” offering unmatched value for investors and home buyers, with the announcement of its attractive pre-launch prices based on a special per square foot rate ranging from USD$ 300 to US$ 400 per square foot.

Pre-launch prices start from Rs. 60 million for 1BR, Rs. 95 million for 2BR and Rs. 140 million for 3BR apartments with easy and convenient payment plans offered, for early bird investors and home buyers to take advantage of this limited time opportunity. With this project expected to attract large foreign currency inflows into the country by gaining traction overseas, a limited number of units will be available for local purchases.

Designed by SOG Architects Singapore and PWA Architects Sri Lanka, Central Park Boulevard Port City will merge with and overlook 40 acres of lush Central Parkland offering a rare resort style living experience in a modern city surrounded by nature, consisting of 37 floors with630 ultra luxury units consisting of unparalleled residential, commercial and recreational spaces in an elite setting with world class amenities. The ultra luxury residential spaces will consist of 1BR, 2BR & 3BR apartments, premium villas and penthouses with uninterrupted Indian Ocean views, sunset views and scenic waterway views.

This twin tower high-rise project which has already obtained cabinet approval, Colombo Port City Economic Commission clearance and having signed the Sales and Purchase Agreement (SPA) with CHEC Port City Colombo (Pvt) Limited, is now fully geared to move forward. Central Park Boulevard Port City is expected to attract large inflows of foreign currency into the country, with the total project value estimated at over US$ 300 million. The project investment of US$ 150 million, by Home Lands, marks the largest real estate investment by a single Sri Lankan developer.

Home Lands, Sri Lanka’s number one, most trusted and most innovative developer, has been shaping the nation’s real estate landscape with a legacy built on trust, innovation, and excellence. Home Lands is the pioneer of resort-style residential developments in Sri Lanka and continues to redefine modern living, setting new benchmarks in quality, design, and lifestyle. As a fully integrated group of 14 companies, including its own construction arm, Heyraa Construction, holding the highest CS2 grading from CIDA, Home Lands delivers end-to-end solutions across real estate, construction, property management, and lifestyle creation, ensuring uncompromised quality, innovation, and customer satisfaction.

With a growing global presence and offices in Australia, Dubai, and London, Home Lands serves both local and international clients, delivering landmark residential projects across the country.

Home Lands has earned multiple accolades, including the Best Developer – Sri Lanka award at the PropertyGuru Asia Property Awards for three consecutive years, and in 2025 was honoured with Superbrands status, becoming the only real estate Superbrand in Sri Lanka.

Home Lands also stands as Sri Lanka’s most reputed developer renowned for timely delivery of projects upholding the highest quality standards. Home Lands has delivered a staggering 3,750 resort apartments and villas across a portfolio of themed mega residential developments with 500 more units ready for delivery within the next 6 months, while a further 2,200+ units are currently under construction across 8 futuristic mega lifestyle development projects, underscoring the company’s scale, momentum, and continued market leadership.