Justice, hypocrisy and politics

Governments of all political hues in Sri Lanka usually do not uphold the foundational legal principle of the presumption of innocence when their political rivals happen to be arrested. The JVP-NPP administration has failed to be different despite its election pledge to usher in a new political culture. Its politicians and propagandists ruthlessly vilify their political opponents who are taken into custody. They apparently consider their rivals held on remand guilty until proven innocent.

The inversion of the presumption of innocence could have disastrous consequences, as evident from a large number of summary executions and political assassinations during the past armed conflicts in this country. The SLFP, the UNP and the JVP have committed the sin of physically eliminating their political opponents.

The current SLPP leaders, while they were in the SLFP-led UPFA government from 2010 to 2015, turned a parliamentary select committee into a kangaroo court against a Chief Justice, and hounded her out of office. The UNP also launched witch-hunts against upright public officials and judges and treated suspects as convicts. The JVP-led NPP has prejudged the guilt of three suspects, including former Justice Minister Wijeyadasa Rajapakshe’s son, Rakitha, and SJB organiser for Horana Charith Abeysinghe, arrested on Thursday on suspicion of seeking a bribe from the wife of a drug dealer in custody.

There is no gainsaying that the law must apply to everyone equally, and all allegations of transgressions must be probed. So, nobody should protest against the arrest of the aforementioned trio unless their legitimate rights are violated while in custody. If they are found guilty after a fair trial, stringent punishment must be meted out to them. This task is best left to learned judges. The government must not seek to gain political mileage out of their arrests. What one gathers from various statements the JVP/NPP politicians, including ministers, have been making about Rajapakshe and Abeysinghe is that the government is labouring under the misconception that they should be considered guilty simply because they have been arrested.

The SJB has suspended Abeysinghe’s party membership and launched a disciplinary inquiry. Such action is welcome. However, Abeysinghe should be given an opportunity to tell his side of the story and defend himself. The principle of natural justice must be upheld. That is how such matters are handled in the civilised world.

JVP/NPP politicians and propagandists continue to blame the SJB for having individuals with underworld links within its ranks. It should put its own house in order before telling other political parties how to deal with their members facing allegations.

Former Energy Minister Kumara Jayakody has been indicted for corruption before the Colombo High Court. The JVP/NPP unashamedly defended him to the hilt when the Opposition moved a motion of no confidence against him in Parliament. He stepped down when it became too embarrassing for the government to keep him in the Cabinet. What action has the JVP/NPP taken against him over charges of corruption? Has it at least held a disciplinary inquiry against him? Why hasn’t it suspended his party membership?

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.