Emergency declared at BIA over ‘bomb scare’ on Indian flight called off

The management of Bandaranaike International Airport (BIA) announced that the emergency situation declared after the reported bomb scare on the Vistara flight arrived at BIA from Mumbai today, has been called off.

Further, after the investigations by the relevant authorities, nothing suspicious was found related to the reported bomb threat on the Vistara flight, the statement said.

The management of Bandaranaike International Airport (BIA) together with all relevant authorities adopted all precautionary and preventive measures on the reported incident to ensure the safety of the passengers, it said.

“We hereby inform our valued passengers and airport users that flight operations at Bandaranaike International Airport (BIA) continue as usual without any disruption to the airport’s normal operations.”

“We sincerely regret any inconvenience this situation may have caused to our valued guests and airport users and appreciate their understanding,” the statement further said.

Earlier today, an Indian passenger flight arriving from Mumbai had made an emergency landing at the Bandaranaike International Airport (BIA) in Katunayake due to a bomb scare.

All 96 passengers and 08 crew members of the flight were evacuated and a special search operation was being carried out in the aircraft at the BIA, Sri Lanka’s Police Spokesman DIG Nihal Thalduwa said.

However, the Airport and Aviation Services (Sri Lanka) (Private) Limited issued a statement regarding the matter confirming that there is no threat over the reported bomb scare on the Vistara flight UK 131 (A320 Neo) from Mumbai to Colombo.

It said that the management of Bandaranaike International Airport (BIA) adopted all precautionary and preventive measures in response to a reported bomb scare on the Vistara flight from Mumbai to Colombo, which was scheduled to arrive at 14:51 hrs at the BIA.

A nonspecific call on a bomb threat had been reported to the captain of the flight 10 minutes before landing at BIA, the AASL said.

After authorities were alerted about the threat, in line with the protocol, all relevant authorities were immediately informed, and an emergency was declared at the Bandaranaike International Airport, it said.

“The flight with 96 passengers and 8 crew onboard landed safely at the airport at 14.49 hrs. All passengers were swiftly evacuated from the aircraft as a precautionary measure to the passenger terminal, and the safety of all passengers was assured.”

Airport and Aviation Services (Sri Lanka) (Private) Limited (AASL), together with other authorities, followed the standard protocols established for such incidents and ensured the safety and security of all passengers and crew was of utmost priority, the statement had said.