Tokyo Cement salutes top performers at 2024 Annual Gala Dealer Convention

Top Category Winners of the Tokyo Cement Annual Dealer Convention 2024 with the Managing Director, Group COO and Group General Manager –Marketing of the Tokyo Cement Group

Tokyo Cement Group recently hosted their top-performing dealers to the prestigious Annual Dealer Convention 2024, held at the Cinnamon Grand Colombo. The star-studded awards night, befitting the outstanding performance of the channel sales partners, recognised over 140 top performers from across the island, who walked away with grand prizes.

City Hardware & Stores – Jaffna, Ancheneyer Cement & Hardware Dealer – Batticaloa, National Trading Stores – Kurunegala, Shanmugam Stores – Kilinochchi, Emerald Hardware – Uduppiddy and Hansika Transport – Katuneriya were crowned best among the best of 2024 at the annual awards ceremony organised by the cement giant.

Held under the auspices of the executive management of Tokyo Cement Company (Lanka) PLC, including the Managing Director S. R. Gnanam, Group COO M. Thayananthan, Consultant Director Christopher Fernando, and Group General Manager – Marketing Dashantha Udawatta, the event brought together the Tokyo Cement Dealers from across the island who were treated to a memorable celebration.

The Managing Director of Tokyo Cement Company (Lanka) PLC S. R. Gnanam offered his highest commendations to the entire sales network for their unwavering cooperation that enabled Tokyo Cement to overcome what could be described as one of the most challenging years in the history of business. Speaking of the tough economic situation of the country, Gnanam reiterated how despite a turbulent marketing environment, Tokyo Cement was able to fulfil its national duty by contributing to uplift the lives of our fellow citizens, all thanks to the steady support extended by the Company’s dealers and distributers.

The Annual Dealer Convention is the primary event to recognise and reward Tokyo Cement Dealers spread across every part of the island. The event celebrates their achievements during the year, backed by Tokyo Cement Group’s trusted range of household cements, concrete and cement-based value-added products, synonymous with quality and reliability. Tokyo Cement together with its dealer network have established a prestigious set of brand names, including Nippon Cement, Tokyo Super, Nippon Cement Pro and Atlas Cement and Tokyo Supermix ready mixed concrete, in addition to the innovative portfolio of cement-based value-added products, starting with Tokyo Superbond, Tokyo Superseal and Tokyo Supercast among others, that have transformed and augmented the local construction industry.

As a truly homegrown Sri Lankan corporate Tokyo Cement Group has enriched our nation for over four decades through local value creation, in which the Company’s dealer network plays a crucial role. Having earned its reputation as the most trusted supplier of high-quality products and solutions backed by superior customer service, Tokyo Cement Group has solidly reaffirmed its position as the leading partner in Nation-building.