UNFPA facilitate mental health enhancement and psychosocial support for frontline responders of Ditwah

Colombo, June 20 (Daily Mirror) - United Nations Populations Fund (UNFPA) has embarked on a mission to facilitate mental health enhancement and psychosocial support for frontline responders of Ditwah and other state workers.

The programme has reached 305 frontline members through six Burnout Management Sessions conducted in Badulla, Nuwara Eliya and Kandy. Frontline responders reached participants included stakeholders from the health sector (Regional Directorates of Health Services) and Divisional Secretariats who supported affected communities following Cyclone Ditwah.

“During Cyclone Ditwah, frontline responders, including midwives, doctors and Divisional Secretariat staff, continued delivering urgent support and services while carrying enormous stress and grief themselves. Even though some of them had lost close family members and their homes, they showed up every day at health clinics and safety centres to support affected communities, while carrying their own grief and exhaustion in silence” UNFPA Representative Phuntsho Wangyel said.

“We understand that burnout is real, and often silent. These sessions are our way of caring for the people who care for others. When we invest in the wellbeing of frontline responders, we strengthen their ability to continue serving communities ensuring a more sustained response for those affected by the disaster” he added.

UNFPA Consultant Kapila Ratnayake said one of the other objectives of the programme is to support the state workers to successfully deal with the issues which they face in the state machinery itself.

The training session in Kandy which was conducted comprised a number of activities for the participants which included a short meditation session, and dramas, activities such as painting pictures. The dramas were aimed at teaching the participants how to deal with personal issues, enrich spirituality and how to maintain mental stability.