Sri Gurudev visits Sri Lanka: stresses influence of country’s economy on the region

Launched 12 technical and vocational training projects in Sri Lanka

Humanitarian and spiritual leader Gurudev Sri Sri Ravi Shankar – Pic by Upul Abayasekara

Humanitarian and spiritual leader Gurudev Sri Sri Ravi Shankar (Sri Gurudev) recently visited Sri Lanka for the sixth time on a three-day tour, stating that Sri Lanka played an important role in the development of the region.

Sri Gurudev, who visited the country on the invitation of Prime Minister Dinesh Gunawardena, is also the Founder of Art of Living Foundation, a global leader in meditation and well-being programs. During his visit, he visited the various projects under the aegis of the Foundation, launching 12 technical and vocational centres around Sri Lanka.

“On this occasion, we are also bringing up 20 skilled development centres all over Sri Lanka. And these skill development centres are going to help our young people to be skilled, to be employed, and they can become entrepreneurs, and they can win the prosperity of their nation. You know, unless the continent together grows and improves, we cannot sustain the economy. In this sense, Sri Lanka is very, very important.”

He also said that since he had been visiting Sri Lanka for many decades now, he had seen the country at its best and the worst. However, as most countries were grappling with economic and social uncertainties, fear and anxieties, Sri Lanka was moving towards a stronger and more prosperous society. Sri Lanka has also made remarkable strides under the current Government, particularly in achieving economic stability and focusing on various key development areas, he acknowledged.  Gurudev called on the Prime Minister at his official residence at Temple Trees. They discussed the prospects of unity in diversity and uniting Sri Lanka by adding happiness into the formula of living. In their dialogue, both leaders explored avenues for further strengthening their bilateral relationship. They discussed opportunities for collaboration in holistic wellness, skills development, and agriculture. The leaders also called for all Asian countries to come together to develop and promote indigenous medicines. Sri Gurudev also had discussions with Speaker of the Parliament of Sri Lanka Mahinda Yapa Abeywardena.

In honour of Gurudev’s visit, a special first day cover which symbolises the enduring friendship and mutual respect between Sri Lanka and Gurudev will be launched, marking a new chapter in mutual collaboration. This marks Gurudev’s visit to Sri Lanka in eight years, which has been met with great enthusiasm by the Sri Lankan public and leadership alike.

While hundreds of followers from around the world accompanied the spiritual leader in his journey to Sri Lanka, thousands of Sri Lankans also flocked to see and accompany the spiritual leader as he travelled across the country.