Sri Lanka’s central bank launches financial literacy month to educate public

ECONOMYNEXT – Sri Lanka’s central bank launched a “Financial Literacy Month 2025” from today (10) with the aim of creating a ‘Financially Literate Sri Lanka’, it said.

It will conduct a series of activities to equip the public “with the knowledge, skills, and attitudes essential for transforming financial behavior, fostering prudent decision-making, and advancing sustainable economic well-being”.

The nationwide initiatives will target diverse groups, including schoolchildren, university students, youth, women, and Micro, Small & Medium Enterprises (MSMEs).

“These initiatives ensure inclusive and accessible financial education for all segments of society.”

Financial literacy discussions will be disseminated through mainstream media channels such as television, radio, and YouTube, along with the telecast of educational videos to extend outreach to wider audiences, it said.

Six regional level “Financial Literacy Day” Programmes and one “Economic and Financial Literacy Forum” will be conducted, facilitating direct interaction with local communities.

Specialized awareness sessions have been organized with an emphasis on empowering youth, women, and MSMEs to make informed and confident financial decisions.

With the Institute of Bankers of Sri Lanka, the central bank has introduced the “Certified Trainer in Financial Literacy” programme, to groom qualified trainers.

A Training of Trainers initiative delivered in Tamil will broaden accessibility for Tamil-speaking communities, the central bank said.

The central bank will distribute notebooks, name-tag stickers, and bookmarks imprinted with vital financial literacy messages, to spread awareness at the grassroot level.

An “Investment Week” programme organized by the University of Kelaniya, will also promote a culture of savings, investment, and responsible financial behavior among the public.

“The Central Bank encourages the general public to actively engage in these financial literacy initiatives and contribute to building a financially literate and inclusive Sri Lanka.” (Colombo/Sep10/2025)