Fcode Labs partners with Porolis to deliver AI-driven innovation to the global gemstone industry

Fcode Labs, a global digital product engineering company, has partnered with Porolis, an innovator in gemstone scanning technology, to launch an AI-powered platform that reimagines how gemstones are analyzed, certified, and showcased in the digital age. The revolutionary solution comprises a cloud-based GemLUX® AIaaS platform and a scanning device KROMA invented by Porolis. Fcode Labs developed the end-to-end software infrastructure, while Porolis provided the proprietary AI model for gem analysis. Combining Porolis’ deep gemstone domain knowledge and advanced optical engineering with Fcode Labs’ expertise in cloud-based software, the solution brings speed, accuracy, and transparency to an industry still reliant on manual processes. The platform allows gemstone professionals to digitally scan and certify gems using AI-driven analysis, with instant access to digital reports and records via a secure cloud dashboard.

“This collaboration brings together world-class hardware and software to solve a deeply practical problem,” said Pansuja Senevirathne, Project Lead for the GemLUX AIaaS Platform at Fcode Labs.

“It’s a perfect example of how emerging technologies can modernize traditional industries.” Fcode Labs’ role included developing both a Windows-native interface for gem scanning and a scalable SaaS platform for managing data, reports, and customer experiences, all designed with usability, security, and future scalability in mind. “Fcode Labs has been a significant Partner to our success, demonstrating strong technical skills, a user-centered design approach and effective business analysis,” said Vincent Wong, the CEO of Porolis. “We bring the same level of design thinking and engineering quality whether we’re working on national health platforms or gemstone certification tools,” said Tharindu Malawaraarachchi, Co-CEO of Fcode Labs.

Melwa sponsors Lankan athlete at Asian African Pacific Powerlifting Championship 2025

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.