Sri Lanka’s first leadership and innovation program for creative debuts

USAID/Sri Lanka and Maldives Office of Governance and Vulnerable Populations Jean MacKenzie

Good Life X (GLX) on Wednesday announced the launch of ‘The Creative Catalyst Fellowship’ (CCF) at Trace Expert City.

The program, funded by the US Government’s development arm - the United States Agency for International Development (USAID), seeks innovative solutions to social issues, harnessing the power of creatives to raise awareness, mobilise resources, and advocate for positive change.

USAID Sri Lanka and Maldives Director,Office of Governance and Vulnerable Populations Asta Zinbo delivered opening remarks highlighting, “Sri Lanka, the region, and the world are facing complex problems such as how to protect our climate and environment. We need new solutions. We are so excited to support this first group of ten fellows from different backgrounds to channel their creative energy to develop constructive solutions and raise public awareness to inspire positive change.  We are eager to see the results of the Creative Catalyst Fellowship next year.”

Through a seven-month fellowship, fellows will confront norms and advocate for change. Thematic cohorts, beginning with this year’s focus on climate action and sustainability, will offer tailored opportunities for fellows to contribute to dialogue and narratives that can positively affect Sri Lanka’s future. By fostering interdisciplinary collaboration, the program seeks to form a community of creative professionals capable of pioneering sustainable solutions to local challenges.

CCF Program Manager Emma de Silva, provided an overview of the program’s structure, which includes a residency program, intensive mentoring, and an exhibition at the end of the fellowship. GLX Founder and CEO Randhula de Silva stated: “Creativity bridges disciplines, transforming abstract ideas into tangible advancements, offering us a path forward where imagination and intellect combine to address the pressing issues we have in hand and shape a brighter future for all. This is the intention of this first of a kind program.”

The launch event featured a panel discussion with Emma de Silva of GLX, Anuki Premachandra of the USAID-supported PRO-INFO project, illustrator, animator and educator Irushi Tennekoon and The Pearl Protectors Founder and Coordinator Muditha Katuwawala. The panel emphasised the need for continued engagement of Sri Lanka’s creative community to positively contribute to building a climate-positive Sri Lanka.

Applications are now open for this year’s cohort. The program seeks experienced creative people from a variety of disciplines—including fine arts, digital arts, photography, film, crafts, performing arts, writing, gaming, poetry, and pottery—who are eager to drive transformative change. More information on the fellowship can be found on goodlifex.com/glx-program/ccf-climate-positive/.

Follow @inspire.with.ccf on Facebook, Instagram, LinkedIn, and Twitter, for all updates. The Creative Catalyst Fellowship will be regularly updated through the program’s dedicated social media pages.

The fellowship is supported by the Promoting Positive Information (PRO-INFO) activity, funded by USAID Sri Lanka through the Civil Society and Media Strengthening together and Advancing in New Directions (CSM-STAND) mechanism, and implemented by IREX to support a more democratic and responsive media environment in Sri Lanka.