Maha Sangha bestows blessings on Dilith Jayaweera, urges to safeguard the nation

A Jaya Pirith chanting ceremony was held this morning (14) in Hikkaduwa to invoke blessings on the ‘Sarvajana Balaya’ presidential candidate, entrepreneur Dilith Jayaweera.

Speaking during the event, the chief incumbent of the Kurunduwatta Bodhimalu Viharaya, Ven. Medamulane Vijayabodhi Thero called on Mr. Jayaweera for the protection of Sri Lanka’s sacred heritage and the Buddha Sasana.

During his address, Ven. Vijayabodhi Thero emphasized the importance of preserving the Kurunduwatta Bodhimalu Vihara and its Buddha statue, urging continued vigilance in safeguarding the nation’s religious and cultural treasures.

“Historically, presidents have sought the wisdom of village monks before visiting the prominent temples. This practice should not be forgotten,” said the Thero.

“Knowledge is a person’s greatest wealth, and seeing your virtue and wisdom, everyone in the nation will treat you well. Always safeguard this blessed land as well as the Ruwanwelisaya, Sri Maha Bodhi, and the Sri Dalada Maligawa (Temple of Tooth Relic). Never forget the sanctity of the village temple”, he added.

Meanwhile, a public meeting as part of the ‘Dilith Gamata’ series of constituency meetings was held in Kaduruwela yesterday (13).

Addressing the gathering, presidential candidate Dilith Jayaweera urged the public to move beyond traditional politics and join together with the ‘Sarvajana Balaya’ alliance for a new direction in the country’s leadership.

“Developed countries of the world use this concept of cooperative,” Mr. Jayaweera said.

“Using that how can we, in Sri Lanka, cultivate our paddy fields more efficiently without physically working the fields? By leveraging modern machinery and technology with minimal costs, we can achieve this. We have proposed the necessary program for that. My program has proposed how to reduce social inequality and distribute wealth more equitably. I am committed to bringing about the change you’ve long desired, enhancing the income status of all Sri Lankans”, he added.

Furthering, he reiterated his commitment to transformative policies aimed at creating a more prosperous and equitable society, with a focus on sustainable growth and modernized agricultural practices.