Sri Lanka manufacturing recovers strongly in May, financial services expand: PMI

ECONOMYNEXT – Sri Lanka’s manufacturing recovered strongly showing in May 2024 from April festival holidays while services also continued to expand at a slower pace, a Purchasing Managers’ Index compiled by the central bank showed.

The Manufacturing PMI index was 58.2 in May from below 50 in April.

“All sub-indices, except for employment, rose above the neutral threshold during the month, resulting in an overall increase in the index value,” the statement said.

“The increases in New Orders and Production sub-indices were mainly attributable to the manufacture of food and beverages sector.

“Most of the respondents mentioned that the considerable increase in production activities was due to more working days prevailed in May compared to the previous month.”

Expectations about the near future was also positive except for concerns about the global shipping amid unrest in the Middle East.

“The industry expectations for the next three months remain positive, anticipating a gradual increase in demand,” the statement said.

“However, many respondents are cautious about the existing issues related to container availability in the global shipping industry.”

The Services PMI was 55 in May, after recoding 56.7 in April.

“…[B[usiness activities in the financial services continued to grow in line with the reductions in market interest rates,” the statement said.

“Further, business activities in the transportation services experienced a considerable growth, while telecommunication, real estate, health and professional services also recorded positive developments during the month.”

Amid a downturn in tourism, business activities in the accommodation, food and beverages services fell.

Wholesale and retail trade also declined with end of the festive season.

New Businesses increased in May, particularly with the increases observed in financial services

Employment increased in May due to new recruitments made by several companies. (Colombo/June19/2024)