HNB announces two key appointments to drive growth and innovation

Hatton National Bank (HNB) is pleased to announce the appointments of Bimal Perera as Deputy General Manager and Chief Growth Officer, and Chandima Cooray as Deputy General Manager and Chief Innovation Officer. These strategic additions to the leadership team at Corporate Management level underscore the Bank’s commitment to drive value accretive growth and pioneer innovation in today’s dynamic business environment.

Bimal Perera – Deputy General Manager and Chief Growth Officer

Bimal Perera joins HNB with over two decades extensive expertise in corporate strategy, investment finance, risk management and digital financial services. With a proven track record of identifying emerging business opportunities and fostering long-term value creation, he brings a wealth of experience in banking, insurance and fintech, into his new role at HNB

His career includes key roles at leading organizations in the financial services domain such as NDB Bank PLC, LB Finance PLC, Allianz Insurance Lanka Ltd & Acuity Knowledge Partners.

At his last assignment at NDB Bank PLC as the VP-Strategy and Business Intelligence, he was instrumental in ushering a transformative change in the bank’s business model supported by cutting edge business intelligence tools. At LB Finance PLC, where he served as Chief Risk Officer and later as DGM – Strategy and Digital Financial Services, Perera played a pivotal role in the company’s expansion into Myanmar and led transformative digital finance initiatives, including the launch of an omni-channel mobile wallet platform.

“I am honoured to join HNB at this exciting juncture. I look forward to driving strategic growth initiatives that create lasting value for our customers, stakeholders, and communities.”

Chandima Cooray – Deputy General Manager and Chief Innovation Officer

Chandima Cooray is a visionary leader with over 25 years of experience leveraging technology to solve complex business challenges. Renowned for his innovative mindset and entrepreneurial spirit, Cooray has consistently delivered impactful solutions across industries.

Starting his career with Unilever and MAS Holdings PLC, Cooray earned national and international recognition for his technological innovations. At Hemas Holdings PLC, he held leadership roles including Chief Process Officer, Chief Digital Officer, and Executive Director of its venture arm, Concept Ventures. His contributions included driving IT transformations, establishing start-up ecosystems, and creating digital landscape blueprints for key sectors.

In his new role at HNB, Cooray will lead the Bank’s innovation strategies, focusing on harnessing disruptive technologies to enhance customer experiences and operational efficiency.

“Innovation is at the heart of progress,” Cooray remarked. “I am excited to contribute to HNB’s mission of delivering cutting-edge solutions that redefine banking for the future.”

HNB warmly welcomes Bimal Perera and Chandima Cooray to the leadership team and looks forward to their contributions in steering the bank toward its next phase of growth and innovation.

“HNB is entering a bold new chapter—one defined by innovation, resilience, and purpose-driven growth. The appointments of Bimal Perera as Chief Growth Officer and Chandima Cooray as Chief Innovation Officer mark a pivotal moment in our journey to reimagine banking for the future. These roles signal our intent to not only adapt to a rapidly evolving financial landscape but to lead its transformation. By empowering businesses, enabling communities, and driving progress, we are laying the foundation for a more inclusive and sustainable economic recovery in Sri Lanka,” said HNB Managing Director/CEO, Damith Pallewatte.

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.