Imthiaz criticises NPP and President’s shift to traditional politics

Says President Anura Dissanayake’s decision to dissolve Parliament just three days after winning is a continuation of old political tactics

Highlights Dissanayake’s shift from warning about dangers of power concentration to claiming there’s no need for an opposition

Calls for national unity and a coalition of forces to overcome current political and economic crises

Samagi Jana Balawegaya (SJB) national list candidate Imthiaz Bakeer Markar has sharply critiqued the National People’s Power (NPP) and its leader, President Anura Dissanayake at a press conference yesterday where he expressed concerns about the rapid shift in political behaviour and the dangers of continuing traditional political practices.

Bakeer Markar noted that this year’s Presidential election reflected the public’s frustration and opposition to conventional politics, with people voting against the established order. However, he questioned whether the NPP has a concrete plan, capable leadership, and a qualified team to lead the country forward.

“People must now think critically. Where is the appropriate program to lead the country, where is the leadership?” Bakeer Markar said. He further criticised the NPP’s decision to dissolve Parliament just three days after their presidential victory, paving the way for a swift general election, an action that contradicts their promise to break away from traditional politics.

He noted that before his Presidency, Anura Dissanayake had expressed concerns about the concentration of power, warning it could lead to dictatorship. However, Bakeer Markar pointed out that Dissanayake has now reversed his position, claiming there is no need for an opposition in Parliament. “This is a betrayal of the promise to change traditional politics and a step toward a dangerous, contradictory path,” he said.

The SJB stalwart urged the people to act wisely and make an informed decision in the upcoming general election to create a balanced system of governance. “We must learn from history, or else we risk becoming victims once again,” he warned. He emphasised the importance of unity and collaboration among all political forces to steer the country out of its current crisis.

The former MP also pointed to the impracticality of isolating Sri Lanka from global financial systems. He endorsed working with the International Monetary Fund (IMF), despite earlier criticism from some political groups. “Those who once condemned the IMF as a debt trap are now walking the same path. Power brings with it the understanding of these realities,” he said in reference to Dissanayake.  Bakeer Markar further highlighted the efforts of the SJB to develop a comprehensive policy framework, noting that the party had appointed 27 subject committees and drafted policies with input from experts. He called on voters to support the SJB’s practical programs, aimed at lifting the country from its economic downfall and taking Sri Lanka on the path of developed nations.

He also urged the public, especially SJB supporters not to lose hope and stressed the need for a unified people’s alliance to solve the country’s problems. “Only a united people’s alliance can lead the country towards a better future,” he said.