Sri Lanka’s Asia Asset Finance asset backed debentures get Fitch ‘A+(lka)’ rating

ECONOMYNEXT- Ratings agency Fitch has awarded Asia Asset Finance PLC’s (AAF, A+(lka)/Stable) outstanding Sri Lanka rupee-denominated secured (asset backed) debentures a National Long-Term Rating at ‘A+(lka)’.

The debentures, which are listed on the Colombo Stock Exchange, will mature in 2026 and have a total outstanding face value of 565.25 million rupees as of 15 October.

“The recovery prospects are assessed to be average and comparable to those of AAF’s unsecured debt under Sri Lanka’s developing legal system,” Fitch said.

Fitch Rates Asia Asset Finance’s Outstanding Secured (Asset Backed) Debentures at ‘A+(lka)’

Fitch Ratings – Colombo – 15 Oct 2024: Fitch Ratings has assigned Asia Asset Finance PLC’s (AAF, A+(lka)/Stable) outstanding Sri Lanka rupee-denominated secured (asset backed) debentures a National Long-Term Rating at ‘A+(lka)’. The debentures will mature in 2026 and have a total outstanding face value of LKR565.25 million as of 15 October 2024. They are listed on the Colombo Stock Exchange.

The secured debentures are rated at the same level as AAF’s National Long-Term Rating in accordance with Fitch’s criteria. This is because the secured debenture holders rank higher in priority to all other unsecured creditors and any preference and ordinary shareholders of the company.

Fitch has not provided any rating uplift for the asset-backed securities, as the recovery prospects are assessed to be average and comparable to those of AAF’s unsecured debt under Sri Lanka’s developing legal system. A default by AAF would constitute an event of default on the debentures.

AAF’s National Long-Term Rating reflects Fitch’s expectation that its India-based parent, Muthoot Finance Ltd (MFL, BB/Stable), would provide extraordinary support to the Sri Lankan subsidiary, if needed. AAF’s standalone credit profile does not drive its National Long-Term Rating, and is assessed to be materially weaker than its support-driven rating. For more details on AAF’s rating, see Fitch Assigns Asia Asset Finance a First-Time Rating of ‘A+(lka)’; Outlook Stable, published on 7 February 2024.

Factors that Could, Individually or Collectively, Lead to Negative Rating Action/Downgrade

A downgrade of AAF’s National Long-Term Rating would lead to similar action on the secured (asset backed) debt rating.

Factors that Could, Individually or Collectively, Lead to Positive Rating Action/Upgrade

An upgrade of AAF’s National Long-Term Rating would lead to corresponding action on the secured (asset backed) debt rating.

REFERENCES FOR SUBSTANTIALLY MATERIAL SOURCE CITED AS KEY DRIVER OF RATING

The principal sources of information used in the analysis are described in the Applicable Criteria.

AAF’s ratings are driven by the shareholder support from MFL and thus, are linked to MFL’s credit profile.