Sri Lanka-France ties strengthen with € 540 m trade, port security, and tourism boost

Sri Lanka-France Business Council holds 21st AGM to chart future cooperation

France to support Colombo Port Safety Project under Global Gateway Strategy

Sri Lanka - France Business Council Immediate Past President Ashiq Lafir

Following a year marked by €540 million in bilateral trade and $485 million in French investment, France is seeking deeper engagement with Sri Lanka by expanding its tourism ties, supporting maritime security, and reinforcing regional cooperation, said French Ambassador Rémi Lambert recently.

This address took place at the 21st Annual General Meeting of the Sri Lanka-France Business Council (SLFBC) held at the Ceylon Chamber of Commerce. The Ambassador attended the event as Chief Guest and Patron of the Council, which serves as a key body facilitating trade and investment ties between the two countries.

During the meeting, MAC Group Chairman Andre Fernando was re-elected as President of the Council, supported by Inter Air Sea and Logistics Assistant General Manager Jonathan Suppiah as Senior Vice President, and of Spillburg Holdings Director and CEO Shaameel Mohideen as Vice President. The Council’s Committee Members for the year include representatives from Puritas Ltd., Diesel & Motor Engineering PLC, Mack Air Ltd., Noyon Lanka Ltd., and CEVA Logistics.

In his address, Fernando highlighted tourism and investment as two strategic avenues through which the Council is working to deepen engagement.  He shared that discussions were ongoing to bring a well-known French sports personality to Sri Lanka to assist with tourism promotion, supported by exposure across French media platforms. On the investment front, he said the Council is in talks to attract France-based investors operating in India to explore opportunities for expansion into Sri Lanka.

These initiatives were part of the groundwork laid over the past year, with the aim of achieving positive outcomes in the medium to long term.

Lambert’s address focused on his diplomatic vision, with the three key pillars of economic collaboration, maritime, logistics and aviation and tourism guiding France–Sri Lanka cooperation.

“Our commercial exchanges are diverse and have now surpassed the half billion euro mark, reaching €540 million by the end of 2024. France ranks as Sri Lanka›s ninth largest investor.. and the first among the European Union countries,” he said, noting that French investment spanned sectors like manufacturing, maritime logistics, and energy.

Well-known companies like Michelin, CMA CGM, and Bureau Veritas, were already operating in Sri Lanka, and they were driving innovation, creating jobs, providing training, and enriching Sri Lanka’s economic landscape, he said.

Lambert also stressed the importance of Sri Lanka maintaining duty-free access to the EU market through the GSP+ scheme, which was “an incredible possibility” that depended on compliance with sustainable social standards. He also noted that a GSP+ monitoring mission had visited Colombo in May, with outcomes now under review in Brussels.

He also underscored Sri Lanka›s strategic location in the Indian Ocean region, at the crossroads between India and the ASEAN  placed the country at the heart of French companies’ strategic vision in South Asia. Additionally, its proximity to France’s overseas territory of Réunion Island made Sri Lanka a natural partner in France’s Indo-Pacific strategy.

“France and Sri Lanka share a deep commitment to maritime security, sustainable connectivity, and environmental stewardship. This region is not just a shared space, but also a shared responsibility.”

He highlighted the arrival of the French naval frigates in Colombo in spring 2025 symbolized the country’s commitment to freedom of navigation and regional stability. He said that France also supported the Colombo Port Safety Project through the Global Port Gateway Strategy and Expertise Force.

“This project was created after the Beirut port explosion… the beginning of a very dramatic economic spiral… This kind of incident must not take place in the maritime region.”

Lambert underscored how France also collaborated with international partners such as Australia, the United States, Poland, Bangladesh, and the European Union to conduct joint maritime training in Colombo, aiming to position the city as a central hub of the Indian Ocean. On the environmental front, he highlighted how France also supported Sri Lanka’s efforts to combat environmental challenges like illicit trafficking, marine pollution, and promote sustainable fisheries.

The Ambassador further emphasised Sri Lanka’s ongoing ratification of the Fisheries 1 Agreement, a WTO commitment against illegal, unreported, and unregulated fishing, as a critical step to protect the country’s fish stocks and blue economy.

Tourism was another key pillar of the bilateral relationship, Lambert stressed. In 2024, France ranked as the fifth-largest source of tourists to Sri Lanka, with 88,000 French visitors drawn by the country’s biodiversity, heritage, cuisine, and hospitality. This number was only increasing and would rise to 100,000 within this year or the next, he said.

With this growing interest, preparation for these tourist arrivals was necessary, including making use of institutes like Alliance Française, which has four branches around Sri Lanka, to help build cultural bridges.

“With an increasing number of visitors from France and other French speaking countries like Canada, Switzerland, and Belgium, it›s very important that you have French-speaking experts and guides.”

Lambert further emphasised the importance of France working with Sri Lanka on geographical indication (GI) promotion for tea, where drawing on the French experience with wines like Champagne and Bordeaux could enhance Sri Lanka’s tea sector competitiveness.

Additionally, the Ambassador discussed the potential of enhanced regional cooperation between France, India, and Sri Lanka, particularly in the context of promoting France›s presence in South Asia. He explained that in light of a recent discussion held in Mumbai with the French Ambassador to India and French Consuls General, there was a growing interest in identifying ways to work together while respecting national identities and differences, and also exploring synergies across the region.

“We are proud to contribute to Sri Lanka’s vision of becoming a strategic maritime and tourism hub in the Indian Ocean. You can rely on the full support of the French Embassy,” he added.