Alumex advances trade compliance and global supply chain excellence with AEO Tier I certification

Alumex Managing Director Pramuk Dediwela (left) receives the AEO Tier I Certification from a senior official of Sri Lanka Customs

Alumex PLC, an aluminium extrusion manufacturer and member of the Hayleys Group has earned the ‘Authorised Economic Operator (AEO) Tier I’ certification from Sri Lanka Customs, placing Alumex among a select group of importers and exporters who uphold the highest standards in Customs procedures and trade integrity, the company said in a statement.

The certification follows a rigorous validation by Sri Lanka Customs, affirming Alumex’s full compliance with all legal, operational, and security benchmarks.

As a leading importer of primary aluminium alloyed billets into Sri Lanka, this certification reinforces the company’s alignment with global best practices in trade security and risk management. It also further strengthens the company’s position as a dependable and compliant partner in the international aluminium sector. Alumex exports to key global markets including Canada, the US, the UK, Germany, Italy, New Zealand, Australia, and Singapore.

The official awarding ceremony was held by Sri Lanka Customs on 29 July amidst distinguished industry and government representatives, in the presence of MP Nishantha Jayaweera as the Chief Guest, highlighting both the national importance of the AEO programme as well as Alumex’s leadership in advancing trade excellence.

Sri Lanka Customs acknowledged that this recognition is a testament to Alumex’s “commitment to excellence, compliance, and outstanding service in the industry”, emphasising that it can now enjoy smooth customs procedures and enhanced credibility with clients and partners - enhancing supply chain speed and reducing cross-border trade costs.

Managing Director Pramuk Dediwela said, “Being awarded AEO Tier I status is a strong endorsement of our commitment to compliance, efficiency, and integrity. It enhances our ability to serve customers through a faster, more secure supply chain while enabling seamless collaboration with local and global partners, logistics providers, and regulators.”

As an AEO-accredited organisation, the certification also allows for deferred duty and tax payments, lower guarantee requirements, and the possibility of on-premises customs clearance, all of which streamline operations and improve turnaround times.

The end result is a faster, more secure, and more transparent import process that ultimately benefits Alumex customers through better delivery timelines and greater reliability. The AEO certification strengthens Alumex’s cooperative relationship with Sri Lanka Customs and trade partners, paving the way for future facilitation under global customs networks, the company said.