Trump unveils Qatari luxury jet for Air Force One fleet

(BBC) - President Donald Trump has unveiled a new Boeing 747-8 jet for Air Force One that the Qatari government donated last year as an "unconditional" gift to the US.

The US military has finished modifications to the luxury jumbo jet, which has been valued at an estimated $400m (£300m).

"This plane was transformed into a flying White House at a level of luxury that nobody's ever seen before," Trump said in a speech at Joint Base Andrews on Friday.

The US Air Force said in a press release that the jet will begin initial commissioning flights - a "final exam" to test out the aircraft's modifications - before it will be used to transport the president.

Modifications to the jet included upgrades in security, mission communications, logistics support, and advanced technology, the Air Force said. Any potential threats from the previously owned aircraft have been "neutralised", it added.

The interiors of the aircraft have been minimally changed, and the exterior has received a fresh red, white, blue and gold paint job.

In May 2025, the Qatari royal family donated the luxury Boeing 747-8 to the US Department of Defense to be used as part of a fleet of planes dubbed Air Force One, which provides air transport for the president.

When news of the gift of the plane was revealed last year, it sparked backlash from both sides of the aisle, including from some Trump allies. Critics argued that accepting such a high-value donation posed a conflict of interest and may be unconstitutional.

While federal law indicates that US officials can only accept gifts under $480, the White House has insisted that accepting the aircraft is legal, and pledged that it will be donated to Trump's presidential library once he leaves office.

"The workmanship of this plane is when you see it, you won't believe it," Trump said in his speech.

"Actually, the quality of woods, the quality of the materials, the quality of the engines - these engines are the finest, they're the best in the world, nothing like it."

"It's really an honour," the president added. "And I want to thank the Emir of Qatar."

Prior to the addition of the Qatari jet, the Air Force One fleet included two 747-200B jets that have been in use since 1990. One of those older models appears to have now been phased out, according to White House communications director Steven Cheung.

"'Well done, good and faithful servant'", Cheung wrote on X, alongside a photo of the older plane. "The Last Ride," he added.

The Air Force said the new jet will be used by the president on an interim basis until Boeing delivers its two long-promised VC-25B jets, which are meant for longer-term Air Force One use but have faced significant production delays.