Pink Eagle consolidates leadership in diversified services and global expansion

Pink Eagle Holdings (Pvt) Ltd, a modern investment holding company, has stepped into the spotlight. Established in recent years and rooted in Sri Lankan heritage, the organisation has rapidly grown from a single founding idea and evolved into a diversified ecosystem including tea exports, logistics, warehousing, food production, and hospitality.

Pink Eagle Holdings is driven with an ambition to redefine what a Sri Lankan business group can achieve on the world stage,and is growing into a trusted name among international investors and partners, with ventures and collaborations covering Sri Lanka, Dubai, UK, France, Kenya, Ethiopia, China, and Taiwan. The Group continues to expand globally, consolidating leadership in Sri Lanka’s export and service sectors through its subsidiaries Continental Tea (Pvt) Ltd, Abanchy Ceylon (Pvt) Ltd, Continental Freight (Pvt) Ltd, T Co by Adra (Pvt) Ltd, Continental Food Products (Pvt) Ltd, and Pink Panda.

Asitha Silva, Group Chairman and Managing Director, Pink Eagle, emphasized, “Pink Eagle’s strength lies in combining Sri Lanka’s traditions with a modern, global mindset. At our core, there is a clear vision to build a resilient and futureready business group that delivers sustainable value, drives innovation, and empowers each subsidiary to achieve exceptional growth and global competitiveness.”

“At Group level, Pink Eagle’s mission is equally focused on strategically investing in highpotential industries, providing strong leadership and governance, and cultivating a culture of innovation, integrity, and performance. Moreover, the Group is able to unlock synergies among the subsidiaries through collaboration and optimized resources, creating longterm, sustainable value and empowering every business unit to excel,” said Silva.

Taking centre stage for the organisation in 2026 are several important milestones. Firstly, the flagship entity of Pink Eagle Holdings, Continental Tea (Pvt) Ltd and its ADRA Ceylon brand celebrate a decade of excellence. In its 10 years of operation, the company is already recognised as a leading exporter of pure Ceylon Tea, serving markets throughout Asia, Europe, and the Middle East, with plans to enter the local market within 2026. Its supply chain is anchored in sustainability, supporting plantation communities through ethical sourcing and long-term value creation.

Indika Abeywickrama, Director–Tea, Continental Tea said, “Celebrating a decade of ADRA Ceylon, we take pride in becoming one of Sri Lanka’s top tea exporters. Our journey of quality, innovation, and global expansion has supported communities and contributed to the country’s export earnings. Throughout the years, we have invested in dedicated warehouse infrastructure and advanced blending and packing machinery to boost production capacity and output quality. In parallel, we will continue to invest in value-added tea products and the development of the ADRA brand throughout international markets, positioning it as a premium Ceylon Tea brand for the modern global consumer.”

Complementing the group’s logistics capabilities is Abanchy Ceylon, which provides smart, reliable freight solutions by air, sea, and land. Over the past year, Abanchy has expanded into the East African market, thereby broadening the group’s logistics reach covering three continents.

Abanchy has heralded a significant step in the digitalisation of Sri Lanka’s logistics sector with the launch of the Avanti app, the first freight forwarding application in Sri Lanka. Importantly, the solution delivers end-to-end freight management to a mobile platform, enabling businesses and individuals to create shipment requests, track consignments in real time, receive instant delivery notifications, and manage all logistics activity from a single dashboard. Supporting multiple carriers and logistics providers, the app caters to local and international shipments alike, including import and export activities and is now available for download via Google Play.

Continental Freight (Pvt) Ltd, the group’s newly incorporated logistics entity, is focused on building a strong global agency network through partnerships with international shipping liners, non-vessel operating common carriers (NVOCCs), and freight forwarding companies.

Serving food and retail sector are the entities T Co by Adra and Continental Food Products (Pvt) Ltd.  T Co, the group’s premium café and lifestyle brand, continues to grow with plans to expand to five key tourist destinations in the country.

Continental Food Products (Pvt) Ltd, a recently incorporated venture, is the group’s entry into large-scale food manufacturing. Designed to meet the growing demand for quality, affordable food solutions, the company focuses on efficient production, consistent standards, and reliable distribution to local and institutional customers.

Pink Panda, the group’s digital convenience platform, extends local focus further as a modern online marketplace designed for the evolving needs of Sri Lankan consumers. Having commenced with food distribution, the platform has plans to expand into other categories, under one ecosystem for greater convenience and accessibility.

With a diversified portfolio and new ventures incorporated each year, Pink Eagle Holdings is forging pathways into the global arena, with the ambition to become a globally recognised Sri Lankan conglomerate delivering sustainable growth, empowering communities, and setting new benchmarks on the world stage is on course.