Hayleys Fentons elevates communication and entertainment experiences with cutting-edge audio-visual integrations

Hayleys Fentons, a pillar of Sri Lanka’s engineering landscape for over a century, proudly announces its dynamic expansion into the Audio-Visual (AV) arena.

Leveraging their established expertise in engineering services, Hayleys Fentons now serves as a one-stop shop for all security, communication, and engagement needs, from sleek boardrooms to captivating concert halls.

Powered by top tier global brands including FBT, QSC, Harman, Electro-Voice, ITC, Epson, Panasonic, DSPPA and Blackmagic, the team is now capable of offering seamless collaboration across borders with high-definition video and crystal-clear audio.

“Expanding into the AV realm allows us to provide even more comprehensive solutions for our clients,” says Hayleys Fentons Managing Director Hasith Prematillake. “From meeting rooms to large-scale entertainment venues, our expert team offers cutting-edge AV technology for consistent quality and a lasting experience.” The new portfolio includes a complete package of audio-visual solutions including video conference solutions, smart classroom solutions, online studio solutions, library automation solutions, lecture room and auditorium solutions, multimedia projection and video walls, and video production equipment.

Hayleys Fentons Security and Communication Division General Manager Jayendra Fonseka said, “Our portfolio of AV solutions cater to diverse needs. In smart classrooms, our interactive technologies promote active learning. For online studios, we provide professional-grade equipment to create captivating video content. Meanwhile, lecture halls and auditoriums benefit from powerful sound systems, dynamic lighting, and high-resolution displays, ensuring impactful presentations and experiences.”

The new audio-visual integrations complement Hayleys Fentons’ existing portfolio, which includes a wide range of security and communication solutions including CCTV and access control, IPTV and MATV systems, conference and public address systems, vehicle and human barriers, car park management systems, security intercom and perimeter protection, guest room management systems and unmanned security solutions.