Nestlé Lanka Named Among Sri Lanka’s Top 10 Employers at EFC National Best Employer Awards 2025

Nestlé Lanka was honoured as one of Sri Lanka’s Top 10 Best Employers at the National Best Employer Awards 2025, organized by the Employers’ Federation of Ceylon (EFC), reaffirming its leadership in people centric workplace practices. The company also emerged as the overall winner of the prestigious Franklyn Amarasinghe Memorial Award for Best Industrial Relations standing out amidst strong competition, cementing its position as a company that fosters progressive, fair, and collaborative industrial relations in Sri Lanka’s HR landscape.

Nestlé Lanka’s Chairman and Managing Director, Bernie Stefan commented “We are deeply honoured to be recognised at the EFC National Best Employer Awards 2025. Being named among Sri Lanka’s Top 10 Best Employers, and receiving the Franklyn Amerasinghe Industrial Relations Best Practices Award, is a meaningful acknowledgment of the people-focused culture we strive to build every day. At Nestlé, people remain at the heart of everything we do. These recognitions reflect our unwavering commitment to fostering a workplace that is inclusive, collaborative, and rooted in respect. I am incredibly proud of our teams whose dedication and passion continue to strengthen Nestlé Lanka as an employer of choice. As a company that has been enriching Sri Lankan lives for 120 years, we remain committed to nurturing our employees’ growth and well-being across generations, and to contributing positively to Sri Lanka’s social and economic progress through responsible and forward-looking HR practices”.

HNB Assurance Wins ICC Award for Best Health Insurance Coverage of the Year – Sri Lanka

Keells Nexus introduces an all new Loyalty App, marking a new era of connected, everyday rewards

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.