‘It’s About Time’ Travelling History Museum opens in Colombo

School students engaging with the interactive exhibits at the ‘It’s About Time’ Travelling History Museum

Visitors and distinguished guests at the official opening of the ‘It’s About Time’ Travelling History Museum at the Colombo Public Library

The ‘It’s About Time’ Travelling History Museum opened its doors to the public on Tuesday at the Colombo Public Library, a joint statement by the European Union Delegation to Sri Lanka and the Maldives and the German Embassy said.

Since its inception in February 2019, the museum has visited 11 towns across 10 districts and seven provinces, including Jaffna, Kandy, Kurunegala, Badulla, Batticaloa, Mannar, and Galle. Drawing on feedback from more than 52,000 visitors, it has been reconceptualised for a renewed visitor experience. The updated iteration will be open to the public for the first time in Colombo from 19 to 23 August, from 8:30 a.m. to 5:30 p.m. daily.

‘It’s About Time’ seeks to deepen people’s understanding of Sri Lanka’s post-independence history by encouraging reflection and dialogue on how Sri Lankans remember and relate to their complex and often contested past. Through interactive and multimedia exhibits, visitors are invited to look beyond history books to engage with everyday peoples’ stories. The museum offers a space to explore multiple perspectives of history, reconnect with collective heritage, and consider citizens’ roles in shaping Sri Lanka’s future.

The official opening of the museum brought together stakeholders from Government, civil society, media, and the diplomatic community, including National Integration Deputy Minister Muneer Mulaffer, EU Ambassador to Sri Lanka and the Maldives Carmen Moreno, German Embassy to Sri Lanka and the Maldives Deputy Head of Mission Sarah Hasselbarth, and Colombo Mayor Vraîe Cally Balthazaar.

“This travelling museum connects us to the real stories and lived experiences of Sri Lankans, giving us a chance to understand different perspectives. It offers a meaningful space to reflect on how we can build a shared future together,” said Moreno.

Emphasising the EU’s and Germany’s shared commitment to promoting innovative approaches in Sri Lanka for social cohesion, Hasselbarth noted: “This museum invites visitors to engage – through interactive exhibits, asking questions, and reflecting on different perspectives. It opens a space where people can challenge their own assumptions and learn about the experiences of others. In doing so, it transforms history from something distant and static into something living, relevant, and shared.”

The new iteration of the ‘It’s About Time’ Traveling History Museum is implemented by the Collective for Historical Dialogue & Memory (CHDM); previous museums were implemented in collaboration with Search for Common Ground (SFCG). The museum is supported by the Strengthening Social Cohesion and Peace in Sri Lanka (SCOPE) program, which is co-funded by the EU and the German Federal Foreign Office and is implemented by GIZ in partnership with the Government of Sri Lanka.