Introducing a Blue Curriculum Across BIMSTEC

ECONOMYNEXT – As the negative impacts of climate change continue to batter the world, a training manual for educators, launched on January 24th, aims to raise awareness of the importance of the Blue, Green and Brown environment amongst the young, and its interconnectedness within the South Asian region.

Titled “Blue Curriculum for Life, Learning Journeys for Sustainability,” the manual is the outcome of a conference held in India in December 2023, for the Bay of Bengal Initiative for Multisectoral Technical and Economic Cooperation (BIMSTEC), member countries.  Both the conference and the training manual, which was launched virtually, during a Web Talk are joint initiatives of the Friedrich Naumann Foundation for Freedom South Asia and the Centre for Civil Society, Delhi.

The activity-based manual provides examples and reflection on unsustainable practices which result in environmental destruction and aims to promote critical thinking among the young.

As Harshit, a student of Hari Vidya Bhavan explained, in his younger days, he did not understand the importance of nurturing something he loved; he told the audience that he plucked a flower, because he liked it, but now, older and wiser, he realises he should have left it on the tree and cared for it.

Explaining the concept following the launch, Dr Shriji Kurup, of the Centre for Environment Education said while the manual uses the ocean as an example, educators are free to adapt themes that relate to their localities and livelihoods of the community. It is meant to raise curiosity amongst the young, so they apply the concepts to their lives he said, adding it is to ‘empower everyone.’  This need not be taught by subject experts, as it is designed to be included under any topic being taught.

It is a tool that teachers and students can use in any way they like and will appeal to both the “formal and non-formal sector, and students can take the book home and interact with their parents as well.”

Kadambari Lohiya of the Directorate of Education, Delhi agreed, stating that while the Blue curriculum is already part of the syllabus of Delhi schools, the trick is for teachers to make it relevant to students.

While the inspiration for the manual comes from the Ocean, it helps to promote understanding of the interconnectivity of South Asian nations, pointed out the Founder of Karkhana, Nepal, Pavitra Bahadur Gautam.

There are ‘microplastics in the snow” he said which is a warning sign that the pristine environment of the Himalayas is under threat.  When the farmer burns chaff in Indian Punjab,’ there’s fog in Katmandu, and when a student in Nepal pollutes the river outside their home, “they must realise it affects the farmers in Myanmar.

Environmentalist and Climate Advocate from Myanmar, Shar Thae Hoy says that bringing the idea of using sustainable resources to the 8–15-year age group is important.

The significance of the Blue curriculum is that it teaches even those who live far away from the ocean that it must be protected, she said.  However, terms and concepts such as Blue economy are new she pointed out, adding the manual must also be available in languages other than English, with examples that would be more relevant to each of the BIMSTEC nations.

Keynote Speaker Shailendra Sharma, Principal Advisor to the Director of Education, Government of New Delhi, stated it is important that the young apply critical thinking in preparing for the challenges of the future.  The manual is activity-based providing an opening for students to take ownership, and ‘how to live in harmony with nature’ understanding the role of land, water and humans. It points to the importance of sustainable development practices.

The manual was jointly launched by Mr Sharma, Dr Amit Chandra, CEO of the Centre for Civil Society, Delhi, and Dr Karsten Klein, Regional Director, FNF South Asia.  Education Policy Consultant, Roshan Joshi, moderated the Web Talk.