Sri Lanka offers general amnesty for military deserters

ECONOMYNEXT – Sri Lanka’s Ministry of Defence has declared a month long general amnesty from April 20 to May 20 for tri-forces absentees, enabling them to receive an official discharge from their respective services.

Absentees of the army, navy and air force will receive their discharge from military service after they settle any financial obligations or amounts due, the ministry said in a statement.

“Absentees who are presently abroad can also obtain discharge without reporting to their respective regiments conforming to following requirements:

a. Those seeking discharge should have no pending disciplinary actions taken against them apart from that of being AWOL.

b. Should have clearance from the Department of Immigration and Emigration confirming their travel abroad was done with legal documents and not on forged documents or by illegal means

c. It should be noted that this amnesty does not apply to those who had gone AWOL and failed to return to the country after attending foreign courses funded by the government or courses offered to Tri Forces by foreign institutes, and those who had proceeded on diplomatic missions or any other requirements.”

The general amnesty is applicable to those who have been absent without Leave (AWOL) prior to 2 April 2024.

Sri Lanka has already started “right sizing” its military gradually to 150,000 by 2030, State Defence Minister Minister Premitha Bandara Tennakoon has said previously.

He said the government is in the process of reducing the army to 100,000, navy to 30,000, and air force to 20,000 from the current numbers.

Sri Lanka military to claim expenses of unreturned military athletes from France

Sri Lanka’s 2024 defence budget of 423 billion rupees has been reduced to 6.5 percent of the gross domestic product (GDP) in 2024 compared to the last year’s 7.5 percent, Tennakoon said.

Soon after the end of a 26-year war against separatist rebels, the defence budget was 13.5 percent of the GDP in 2010. (Colombo/Apr4/2024)