Sri Lanka Police announce traffic plan for New Year’s Eve

ECONOMYNEXT – Sri Lanka Police said they are expecting a large number of people arriving in Colombo’s Galle Face area for the new year’s dawn, and announced a traffic plan to minimise congestion.

A large number of people and vehicles are expected to come in to Galle Face premises from outside Colombo to celebrate the dawn of New Year 2025,” Sri Lanka Police said in a statement.

Large crowds and congestion were seen in the area during Christmas.

“Therefore, the Sri Lanka Police is going to implement a special traffic plan to reduce the traffic congestion in Pettah, Fort, Kompanya Veediya, Maradana, Kollupitiya, Bambalapitiya and Kurunduwatta Police divisions in Colombo city.”

No parking will be allowed at the parking lots located on Galle Face road and all traffic will be diverted to public and private parking lots located around the city, it said.

Fort: Wimaladharmasuriya Clock Tower – Charmans car park, Rasik Farid Mawatha – Hemas car park, D R Wijewardena Mawatha – Lake House car park

Kompanya Veediya: Union Place, Dawson Street Junction – Access Tower car park

Parking Bays on Galle Road from Wellawatta Savoy to Bagatale Road junction

Entry lane (left) from Ananda Coomaraswamy Mawatha Nelum Pokuna Roundabout towards Library Roundabout

Right side of road from Reed Avenue junction to Thurston junction

Independence Avenue right side of the road from Independence Roundabout to Independence Square

In order to reduce traffic congestion, vehicle entry into Galle Face will be limited from 4 pm.

Heavy vehicles and buses leaving Colombo from Ceramic Junction via Regal Junction D R From Wijewardena Mawatha and Chittampalam Abraham Gardiner Mawatha, will be directed towards Kompanya Veediya Junction.

Light vehicles will be diverted from Ceramic Junction to Lotus Road, N S roundabout, Galle Face Middle Road to MOD junction, Baladaksha Mawatha towards Aliya Nana Roundabout, Uttarananda Mawatha, St Michael’s Roundabout, Liberty Roundabout.

Heavy vehicles and buses entering Galle Face will enter Colombo from Kollupitiya Junction via Dharmapala Mawatha Lipton Roundabout, Ibbanwala Junction, Darley Road, Maradana Junction, Technical College Junction.

Light vehicles will enter through Kollupitiya Junction, Galle Face Roundabout, Galle Face Middle Road, NSA Roundabout, Janadipathi Mawatha, Bank of Ceylon Mawatha.

“During the implementation of this traffic plan, no vehicle will be allowed to be parked on the sidewalks and main roads of Colombo city and Sri Lanka Police will implement the law against the drivers who violate these traffic rules.” (Colombo/Dec31/2024)