The British Council announces new arts grant supporting cultural projects between UK and Sri Lanka

The British Council is thrilled to announce the opening of applications for its Connections Through Culture arts grants, a £700,000 grant programme designed to foster artistic and cultural collaborations between the UK and Asia-Pacific countries.

Applicants in Sri Lanka can apply for grants of up to £10,000, for projects that enable genuine international collaboration between the UK and Asia-Pacific countries. We accept applications from all artforms, however proposals responding to Climate Change, and Diversity and Inclusion may be prioritised during final decision making. Projects supported by the Connections Through Culture Grants are required to include at least one UK-based applicant and one applicant based in Sri Lanka.

The Connections Through Culture grants support new international collaborations between the UK and Sri Lanka, offering grant support to organisations and artists in the development of their creative projects.

“We’re proud to be supporting new creative collaborations between the United Kingdom and Sri Lanka through our Connections Through Culture grants”, said Orlando Edwards, Country Director, The British Council Sri Lanka.

“These grants can spark big ideas and major collaborations. We’re proud to be providing this support, keeping the doors open for artists in both countries to make connections and showcase their talents on the international stage. Connections Through Culture grants not only create meaningful artistic exchanges but help to bring greater understanding that will enrich the global creative landscape.”

The British Council is inviting applications that showcase new artistic collaborations between the UK and Asia-Pacific.

To support applicants, the British Council is offering a comprehensive set of resources to assist potential applicants, including an application toolkit with valuable tips and detailed insights into the programme’s context.

Potential applicants can find more information on the British Council website, including a toolkit, frequently asked questions, and information sessions to support organisations and artists through the application process.

The British Council is the UK’s international organisation for cultural relations and educational opportunities. We support peace and prosperity by building connections, understanding and trust between people in the UK and countries worldwide. We do this through our work in arts and culture, education and the English language. We work with people in over 200 countries and territories and are on the ground in more than 100 countries. In 2022-23 we reached 600 million people.

Occidental Eden Beruwala’s Sippi: Serving up gastronomy with a slice of paradise

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.