Former Tamil National Alliance MP meets Sri Lanka’s new president

ECONOMYNEXT — Former Tamil National Alliance MP S Shritharan has met President Anura Kumara Dissanayake, according to the president’s media division (PMD).

According to the PMD, the former Jaffna district MP met President Dissanayake at the Presidential Secretariat in Colombo on Tuesday October 01.

“During the meeting, former MP Shritharan congratulated President Dissanayake on his election as the ninth Executive President of Sri Lanka, reflecting the will of the people. The two also engaged in a warm and friendly conversation,” the PMD said in its statement.

Shritharan in a Facebook posted on Tuesday said he had handed over a letter to the president discussing the expectations and stand of the Tamil people.

When asked about the Dissanayake administration’s position on the ethnic issue, newly appointed cabinet spokesman and minister Vijitha Herath told reporters Tuesday morning that the process of drafting a new constitution will begin once a new National People’s Power (NPP) government has been elected.

“It was a presidential election that was held recently. A president was elected. A parliamentary election has been called to elect a government. Regarding a solution to the ethnic issue, our manifesto clearly states that a new constitution will be drafted and presented before the people of the country for their approval. We will begin that process once the new government has been formed,” he said.

On the campaign trail, Dissanayake as presidential candidate of the NPP said an NPP government will hold a referendum on a new constitution, hold the delayed provincial council and local government polls within a year, and appoint a commission to investigate discrimination.

Speaking at a rally in Jaffna on September 05, Dissanayake said an NPP administration will draft a new constitution on the premise of equality, democracy and participatory governance as one country, picking up where the 2015-2019 administration left off.

“A lot of southern politicians try to make deals with the people of north. They say ‘Vote for us; we’ll give you the 13th amendment or 13 or land powers’. How long have they been doing this? I’m not here for that. If I came to make a deal with you, you might say 13 is not enough, give us plus. My first intention is to build a government that has won the confidence of both the north and the south,” he said. (Colombo/Oct02/2024)