JXG records 44% topline growth at close of 1H FY26

JXG (Janashakthi Group) announced consolidated results for the first half of the financial year 2026 (1H FY26), ended 30 September 2025, demonstrating solid momentum in profitability and strong growth across key financial and operational metrics. “We are pleased to see the positive trajectory continue into the first half of FY26, with performance surpassing the previous year,” said Ramesh Schaffter, Managing Director/ Group CEO, JXG (Janashakthi Group).

=Net profit for 1H FY26 climbed to LKR 3.4 billion, delivering a notable improvement from the same period last year

=Revenue for the same period was LKR 15.8 billion, up 43.6% year-on-year (YoY), supported by solid contributions from the Group’s key business verticals, particularly investment banking.

=Total assets amounted to at LKR 193.5 billion, indicating a 19.9% YoY growth.

For 1H FY26, First Capital Holdings PLC, the investment banking vertical of the Group, achieved a Net Profit After Tax (NPAT) of LKR 3.4 billion, compared to LKR 897 million in the corresponding period last year. The strong performance was driven by the Primary Dealing division and Corporate Dealing Securities division, which capitalised on market movements through proactive positions.

For the year-to-date (YTD) period ending the third quarter, Janashakthi Insurance PLC (FYE December), the insurance vertical of the Group, posted a remarkable NPAT of LKR 2.8 billion, more than three times the LKR 801 million reported in the same period last year. New business premiums increased 72% during the period, reflecting strong growth in underwriting.

Janashakthi Finance PLC, the finance and leasing vertical of the Group, recorded NPAT of LKR 141 million for 1H FY26, supported by Net Operating Income of LKR 1.4 billion, representing 34.0% YoY growth. The Company also achieved robust portfolio growth of 48.7% YoY, reaching LKR 26.7 billion, capturing rising demand across key lending segments.

From a strategic standpoint, the group’s performance reflects disciplined execution of corporate strategy, building integrated, high-growth businesses across financial services, leveraging strong capital market activity and expanding underwriting and portfolio capabilities.

Seylan Bank partners Colombo Motor Show 2025 as Official Banking & Leasing Partner

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.