Sri Lanka invites Malaysian corporates to partner in next growth phase

Sri Lankan High Commissioner to Malaysia Dharshana M. Perera (third from left) with the organising committee

Sri Lanka has invited Malaysian businesses to actively collaborate with the strategically located Indian Ocean island nation to enhance the competitiveness of Malaysian corporates, establish strong and sustainable supply chains, and become key partners in Sri Lanka’s next phase of growth.

Speaking at the business networking event themed “Business Beyond Borders”, held on 22 September at the Commonwealth Club, Kuala Lumpur, to discuss trade and investment opportunities, Sri Lankan High Commissioner to Malaysia Dharshana M. Perera, submitted that Sri Lanka provided a stable political and economic environment for business, pointing to the political stability achieved through a democratic process and the strong governance framework under the Clean Sri Lanka program.

He observed that the elevation of Sri Lanka’s Fitch sovereign rating from ‘CCC+’ to ‘B’ on 21 September reflected strengthening macroeconomic fundamentals, including fiscal stability, growing foreign exchange reserves and projected economic growth of 5% through to 2030.

The event, organised by the Malaysia-Sri Lanka Business Chamber (MSLBC) and the Malaysia-Vietnam Chamber of Commerce (MVCC) in Kuala Lumpur, in collaboration with key sponsors and with the support of the respective diplomatic missions of Sri Lanka and Viet Nam in Kuala Lumpur, brought together more than 75 business executives from multiple sectors, including manufacturing, tourism, IT, real estate and construction, consultancy services, trading, financial and banking institutions, among others, as well as key Malaysian government agencies.

Malaysia-Sri Lanka Business Chamber Chairman Anand Sharvanandan, Deputy Chairman Mahen Muthiah, Malaysia-Vietnam Chamber of Commerce Vice President Kelvin Ling, and Malaysia-Vietnam Chamber of Commerce Secretary General James Tan, provided organisational leadership for the “Business Beyond Borders” event.

Presenting opportunities for collaboration in investment, High Commissioner Perera, presented a set of carefully developed Ready to Invest projects designed by the Board of Investment of Sri Lanka and the Sri Lanka High Commission, covering the energy, tourism, manufacturing, real estate, shipping and logistics, agriculture and IT sectors. The proposals provided key information, including project locations, investment incentives, market growth trajectories, revenue models, and Net Present value (NPV) and Internal Rate of Return (IRR) calculations.

The High Commissioner invited Malaysian corporates to seize the opportunity to participate in the business and investment event, SRI LANKA EXPO 2027, scheduled to take place in Colombo from 14 to 17 January 2027. He said Malaysian businesses should consider Sri Lanka as a dependable supplier of goods, given its diverse range of export products, including IT services, boat and shipbuilding, gems and precious stones, fisheries, apparel and food products. He further highlighted opportunities for Malaysian businesses to partner with Sri Lanka and access a market of approximately 3.5 billion people in the EU, UK, India, Pakistan and other destinations through Sri Lanka’s market access.

Sri Lanka looks forward to welcoming Malaysian corporates to SRI LANKA EXPO 2027.