Conflicting around ‘Island of Treasures’

Veteran Film Director Tissa Liyanasuriya who introduced Malini Fonseka to Cinema turned 80 on 17th January 2026. Among his medals of Cinematic honors is Island’s 1st full length colour movie ‘Ranmuthu Duwa’ (Island of Treasures). He was the deputy of director Mike Wilson & the movie was jointly produced by Shesha Palihakkara & Sir Arthur C. Clarke in 1962. It was an action adventure centered on the discovery of a sunken, cursed treasure near Trincomalee. Bandu (played by Gamini Fonseka) seeks to recover the treasure to build a temple, while a villainous gang pursues it for greed (Ref. Cinema history). Though some feel that Sri Lanka was cursed since 1948, in the 4th century AD Sri Lankans have had a stable economy with strong trade relations with Great China. Thus Sri Lankans renamed Trincomalee as ‘China Bay’ (Cheena Varaaya) & Chinese chronicles have referred to Sri Lanka as the Island of Treasures (Ref. Mahavansa).

The international day for the fight against illegal, unreported & unregulated fishing falls on 5th June. In June 2023 when Sri Lankan government had difficulties to support fishing communities due to economic obstacles, China extended support by granting LKR 1.5 billion worth of humanitarian assistance. It included a prefabricated housing scheme, fishing equipment, & packs of rice for fishing communities in North & East. China also donated kerosene to 27000 fishing boats throughout Sri Lanka (150 liters per boat). These three assistance packages of LKR 500m each was the largest offered by China in the two provinces in post 2009 period (Ref. Media). Prior to 2009 during the 30 year conflict China always worked with respective governments & the armed forces to maintain stability in Sri Lanka.

Though some believe that Indian society hasn’t helped fisher folks in North & East due to caste issues, conflict analysts might say that they helped develop grass root military skills before the northern railway line was blown off. However, as a stable Sri Lanka with a stable North & East are politically important for India, after 2009 India supported to reconstruct the iconic ‘Yaldevi’ railway line (destroyed in mid 1980s) & to reconstruct houses in the North & East. Though Indian support on solid land is respected, some feel that Indian actions on liquid (ocean) fluctuated especially due to fishing conflicts with bottom trawling etc.

It isn’t clear if PM Modi gave a signal to Sri Lankans when he sang ‘Suranganita Maalu Genva’ with his soldiers but it was indeed a pleasant surprise for Sri Lankans. However, the 29th January assault incident (where Indian officials were blamed for assaulting Lankan fishermen on Lankan waters) may not have been a surprise. Though Indian authorities denied the charges (Ref. Media), it will be a challenge to fish without conflicts especially in the northern waters. It may increase when Sri Lanka involves more with the Belt & Road Initiative (BRI) of China. One way to mitigate risk would be to invite rich Indians to connect with the BRI via Sri Lanka. In the recent months Chinese made vehicles have increased on Sri Lankan roads. One might know that some are imported by entities with Indian interests. Sri Lankans will have to be mindful to avoid a repetition of a ‘Sena & Guttika’ era where two Indian horse traders were able to rule the island for a decade. Even if that happens, China may be the last line of defense as always (Refer. 25 centuries of recorded history). Managing both for Sri Lanka’s benefit is the challenge.

Global vehicle exporter AA Japan opens Sri Lanka office, eyes market growth with its 30 years of expertise

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.