Forte Diagnostics and Health Vectors Partner to Launch Sri Lanka’s First AI-Powered Medical Diagnostics

Forte Diagnostics is transforming the island’s medical and technological sectors by launching the nation’s first Artificial Intelligence (AI)-powered medical diagnostics and health data visualisation platform, in collaboration with Health Vectors, India’s leading health intelligence company. This strategic partnership represents a technological upgrade and a bold commitment to patient-centric innovation in the country, and combines Forte Diagnostics’ excellence in laboratory testing with Health Vectors’ visionary platform that’s already transforming lives across India.

The launch event, which took place recently at the Shangri-La Colombo, ushered in a new era of smart, connected healthcare in Sri Lanka.

The event included live demonstrations of AI-powered diagnostic report interfaces, keynote addresses by medical and technology leaders from both Sri Lanka and India and presented networking opportunities with healthcare visionaries and digital health experts.

For the past several decades, medical reports in Sri Lanka have remained relatively static, text-heavy, and difficult for the average patient to interpret and understand. This is set to change significantly with the integration of Health Vectors’ advanced AI technology into Forte Diagnostics’ laboratory systems. Patients will now receive interactive, easy-to-understand, and visually rich diagnostic reports – personalised to their health status and powered by real-time AI analysis. From detecting early warning signs to helping clinicians prioritise care, the new platform provides a 360-degree view of a patient’s health profile, making healthcare smarter, faster, and more empowering for all.

Sri Lanka Convention Bureau elevating MICE industry to new heights

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.