President outlines plans to amalgamate vocational training institutes in Sri Lanka

President Ranil Wickremesinghe on Thursday (Feb.22) underscored that restructuring of vocational education should align with the demands of the modern world, ensuring that the country’s youth are equipped to excel in the competitive global job market.

He also outlined plans to consolidate all vocational training institutes in Sri Lanka into a single vocational college, offering contemporary subject-related courses, the President’s Media Division (PMD) said.

Wickremesinghe conveyed these initiatives during his observation tour at the Ratmalana Lalith Athulathmudali Vocational Training Centre, where he interacted with the students.

Established in honour of late Minister Lalith Athulathmudali, the institution, under the purview of National Youth Service Council, offers a spectrum of vocational technology courses including motor mechanics, information technology, 3D planning and designing, language studies, preschool teaching, beauty culture and other contemporary programs essential for the evolving job market.

During his visit, the President has toured the classrooms, engaging with students to inquire about their education and well-being, according to the PMD. He also participated in a brief discussion with the students, addressing their queries.

In response to a question regarding opportunities for Sri Lankan youth in the realm of modern technology, the President highlighted the country’s swift digital transformation, emphasizing the prioritization of advancements such as Artificial Intelligence (AI). He expressed optimism about Sri Lanka’s trajectory in embracing evolving technologies.

Responding to a student’s request to establish her own pre-school after completing her studies, Wickremesinghe assured that the government would also focus on supporting such initiatives as part of the program to advance pre-school education.

The President also penned a commemorative note in the guest book at the Vocational Training Centre and posed for a group photograph with the students. Following this, he engaged in cordial discussion with the students, taking the opportunity to snap a few ‘selfies’ with them, the PMD added.