CTC announces appointment of Fariyha Subhani as managing director

Ceylon Tobacco Company PLC (CTC) announced the appointment of Fariyha Subhani as Managing Director and Chief Executive Officer, effective 15th April 2024.Subhani takes over the reins as Managing Director from Monisha Abraham, who was appointed to the position in December 2021. Prior to joining CTC, Fariyha served as Managing Director for Upfield (Private) Limited, South & Central Asia, a leading private equity food company. She also spent 28 years with Unilever PLC where she held various senior leadership roles, across geographies and a number of diverse FMCG categories.

In 2002, she moved on an international assignment to Thailand with Unilever, where she was responsible for Global and Regional brands across Homecare. She successfully led the business for over three years and then returned to Unilever Pakistan in 2006 to head the Unilever Pakistan Foods Ltd (UPFL) business and became CEO of UPFL board in 2009. At the same time, she also took over as Director Foods, with ice cream and tea categories added to the portfolio. She helped to establish a great culture in the organization and deliver profitable growth for the business.

As Managing Director for South and Central Asia, she established a new business with Upfield (Private) Limited across Pakistan and Sri Lanka. She was instrumental in setting up a world class team, sustainable business practices, systems and operations to lead the expansion of retail and food service business delivering profitable growth over the five-year period. She also passionately led Upfield’s ESG agenda across the Region.

Subhani holds an MSC in International Relations from Quaid-e-Azam University, Islamabad and an MBA from the Lahore University of Management Sciences, Lahore, Pakistan.

Lanka Hospitals Academy consolidates its hold on healthcare education in Sri Lanka

CTC retains position as ‘Top Employer’ for 3rd consecutive year

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.