Japan willing to restart stalled Sri Lanka projects, LRT to be reevaluated

ECONOMYNEXT – A Japanese delegation visiting Sri Lanka has discussed the resumption of Japanese Official Development Assistance (ODA) projects that were suspended when Sri Lanka defaulted.

The delegation said that several projects including the Bandaranaike International Airport (BIA) Development Project, the Colombo Port Eastern Terminal Development Project, the Central Expressway Construction and the Digital Broadcasting Project, can be promptly restarted”, according to the president’s media division.

“These projects, which include several initiatives that were suspended last period, are now poised to restart, signaling a renewed phase of cooperation and development.”

The Japanese officials said there was potential to resume the Light Railway Transit (LRT), which was halted by the previous government. Japan is “actively assessing locations to re-implement this project, recognizing its significant potential to alleviate traffic congestion in Colombo city.”

Head of the team Izumi Hiroto “praised the successful completion of the country’s debt restructuring process, noting that it has paved the way for the resumption of ODA projects”.

The delegation comprised representatives from the housing, construction, and urban sectors.

The discussion also focused on new investment opportunities in Sri Lanka, and the potential for better cooperation between the two nations.

President Ranil Wickremesinghe, who is seen as a pro-Japan leader, thanked Japan for its support during Sri Lanka’s debt restructuring process, and across various sectors, including education and agricultural modernization.

The Japanese delegation “expressed their willingness… to recruit Sri Lankan graduates in the field of technology for job opportunities in Japan’s private sector. This initiative aims to improve the electricity supply sector in Japan.”

Both sides emphasized the significance of Public-Private Partnerships (PPP) in executing housing for low-income earners and other urban development projects. (Colombo/Jul19/2024)