Hayleys Group sponsors 260 cataract surgeries through HelpAge Sri Lanka’s ‘Give the Gift of Sight’ initiative

Hayleys Chairman and Chief Executive Mohan Pandithage presents a personalised surgery sponsorship card to a patient at the HelpAge Eye Hospital in Wellawatte, Colombo 6.

Hayleys Chairman and Chief Executive Mohan Pandithage presents a sponsorship cheque to HelpAge Sri Lanka’s Executive Director Samantha Liyanawaduge, in support of the ‘Give the Gift of Sight’ campaign. The gesture, alongside Hayleys Leisure Managing Director Rohan Karr (left), HelpAge Operations Theatre-In-Charge C.E. Fernando, and HelpAge Sri Lanka Community Relations Manager Tharika Goonathilake, highlights Hayleys’ commitment to impactful corporate social responsibility

Hayleys and HelpAge Sri Lanka teams at the launch of the ‘Give the Gift of Sight’ campaign, at the HelpAge Eye Hospital in Wellawatte, Colombo 6. In the centre, Hayleys Leisure Managing Director Rohan Karr, alongside HelpAge Sri Lanka Executive Director Samantha Liyanawaduge, and Hayleys Head of Group HR & Legal Darshi Talpahewa. Also present are Hayleys Assistant Manager of Group Medical Chandrika Dissanayake, and HASL Community Relations Manager Tharika Goonathilake. On the extreme left are HelpAge Eye Hospital Junior Executive Dilshan Randika, and Kingsbury Hotel Colombo Director of Operations Travis Casather

Last week marked the conclusion of the Hayleys Group’s benevolent corporate sponsorship of 260 cataract surgeries as part of the HelpAge Sri Lanka (HASL) “Give the Gift of Sight” 2023 campaign.

This meritorious act of corporate empathy was backed by a sponsorship exceeding Rs. 5 million from the Group, aimed at contributing to HASL’s goal of raising funds for 2,000 cataract surgeries for underprivileged elderly individuals in Sri Lanka.

Led by Hayleys PLC Chairman and Chief Executive Mohan Pandithage, 13 sectors within the Hayleys Group of Companies united to sponsor these surgeries. Each sector sponsored the cost of surgeries for one day, amounting to 20 surgeries performed daily at the HASL Eye Hospital, at Wellawatta, Colombo 6.

Pandithage, who visited the hospital and interacted with patients’ post-surgery, said, “As a purpose-led business striving to make lives better, social responsibility is a part of our Group’s core values. Senior citizens have made remarkable contributions to society throughout their lifetimes. By supporting the Helpage ‘Give the Gift of Sight’ initiative, we look to empower the elderly in a meaningful way, helping them regain their sight so that they may continue to lead fulfilling lives.”

HelpAge Sri Lanka Executive Director Samantha Liyanawaduge conveyed gratitude to Hayleys for their sponsorship. “Given the challenges faced by over 500,000 elderly individuals in Sri Lanka, where the risk of losing sight is heightened due to financial and mobility obstacles, donor support in this endeavour is crucial,” he emphasised.

“Hayleys has set a commendable example for corporate compassion, illuminating the path for other companies to make a meaningful impact by partnering to support crucial causes.”

Over the festive season of December 2023, Managing Directors of Hayleys Group Companies, HR leaders and volunteers visited the HelpAge Eye Hospital to interact with patients and inquire about their well-being. Essential items such as dry rations, meals, and diverse products made by the companies were distributed to patients and their custodians traveling from all parts of the country.