Janashakthi Finance records 35% growth in Net Operating Income and LKR 389 Mn. PBT in Q3 FY26

Janashakthi Finance PLC, formerly known as Orient Finance PLC and a subsidiary of JXG (Janashakthi Group) announced a strong financial performance for the nine-month period ended 31 December 2025, driven by sustained growth in its core businesses, disciplined execution and continued focus on scale and efficiency.

Commenting on the results, Rajendra Theagarajah, Chairman of Janashakthi Finance PLC, said, “The performance for the period reflects the clarity of our strategic priorities and the strength of our governance framework. With strong leadership in place that is confidently driving the business, we continue to grow steadily while maintaining balance sheet strength and stakeholder confidence.”

For the period under review, Profit Before Tax (PBT) rose by 39% year-on-year to LKR 389 million, supported by higher operating income and portfolio expansion. Net Operating Income increased by 35% year-on-year to LKR 2.2 billion, reflecting sustained lending activity and improved business scale.Net Profit After Tax (NPAT) amounted to LKR 240 million.

The Company’s Loans and Receivables portfolio grew by 49% year-on-year to LKR 29 billion, driven by demand across key lending segments and focused growth initiatives. Deposits increased to LKR 17 billion, recording a 14% year-on-year growth, reinforcing funding diversity and customer confidence.

Reflecting on the year’s progress, Sithambaram Sri Ganendran, Chief Executive Officer of Janashakthi Finance PLC, stated, “During the period, we focused on expanding our loan book responsibly, strengthening our funding base and enhancing operational capability. The growth achieved across our key indicators positions the Company strongly as we continue to execute our medium-term strategy and respond to market opportunities.”

CBSL keeps overnight policy rates unchanged; latest review of IMF program awaited

JKH posts strong Q3 EBITDA growth of 68% to Rs.23.76 billion driven by momentum across the portfolio

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.