Sri Lanka’s NPP govt must talk to IMF about lowering taxes: Sajith

ECONOMYNEXT — Sri Lanka’s National People’s Power (NPP) government must negotiate lower taxation with the International Monetary Fund (IMF), former opposition leader Sajith Premadasa said.

Speaking at an event, Premadasa said his party the Samagi Jana Balawegaya (SJB) will support the NPP government’s efforts to discuss a new arrangement with the IMF that will see taxes lowered.

“We always told IMF officials that we must enter a new agreement that is more concessional for the public. We campaigned for the presidential election on that foundation. We are watching to see when the present government will commence talks with the IMF again and enter a new agreement that will see the tax burden on the people relieved. We will support such a programme on behalf of the people,” he said.

“This new president and the government have a responsibility to discuss with the IMF and enter a new programme that will reduce the tax burden,” he added.

During the presidential election campaign, NPP leader Anura Kumara Dissanayake, who emerged victorious, had proposed that Sri Lanka’s income tax-free threshold be increased to 2.4 million rupees a year from the current 1.2 million and to “equitably” amend tax rates and tax brackets.

The NPP’s election manifesto released in August also proposed that the tax base be widened according to taxation fundamentals.

Increasing the tax-free threshold to include people who earn up to 200,000 rupees a month will likely exclude many people from the tax base, however.

Dissanayake first proposed this increase in January 2023. He also said at the time that an NPP government would cap progressive taxation at a maximum of 24 percent.

Treasury Secretary Mahinda Siriwardana said in August that Sri Lanka’s planned relief to personal income tax payers could cost 0.08 percent of gross domestic product in lost revenues and would be compensated by additional tax measures.

The Dissanayake administration has retained the services of Siriwardena since the change in government.

Then President Ranil Wickremesinghe also said in August that Sri Lanka and the IMF had discussed giving income tax relief by widening tax slabs.

“The Treasury began negotiating such an amendment with the IMF as far back as September 2023,” Siriwardana said, speaking at an event.

“It was not possible to implement such a proposal previously given the fact that revenue was falling short of targets.

“However, with the improvement in revenue performance this year, it has become possible to negotiate an adjustment to the PIT (Personal Income Tax) structure which provides some relief to the tax payers in the middle bands, whilst ensuring there isn’t an excessive gain for the highest income earners.

“The proposed adjustment to the PIT is estimated to cost around 0.08 percent of GDP and compensating revenue measures have already been discussed with the IMF, such that revenue targets are not compromised,” he said. (Colombo/Oct18/2024)