Unique opportunity for fast-tracked social integration, if only…

Surely, racism has caused enough damage to us to warrant its erasure from our midst with the condemnation it deserves, without leaving it more room to further flourish in deceptively benign ways. As showcased by the November 14 election results, many Tamils and Muslims, not forgetting Catholics and Hindus, have voted to power the NPP, led by the JVP, which they might have previously labelled, and avoided, as a ‘Sinhalese’ party.

This turning of tables has obviously been triggered by the country’s worsening political and economic conditions, but the story should not end there because people’s unprecedented shift of faith strongly indicates the relaxing of the rigid social and cultural postures which may prove to be more important in a multi-ethnic and multi-religious society. This is because, if used wisely and sensitively, it has the potential to be directed towards the evolution of a society where there wouldn’t be much room for further social fragmentation, hitherto sustained by the biases felt at the deepest levels of our sense of ‘self and other’. Dr. Jehan Perera in his article titled  “Reading demands for change” (The Island, November 19, 2024) says, “Unlike in the case of economic recovery for which there are no short-term panaceas, the solution to the ethnic conflict is one that can be resolved soon as it has been discussed, negotiated and publicised on several occasions, but not implemented due to the failure of leadership”. The government may seize the opportunity to “make hay while the sun shines”.

The mercurial nature of ‘identity’ and ‘self’ is well-known. They are a topic of discussion in neuroscience, psychology, humanities, social sciences, religions and, notably, in Buddhism. In humanities and social sciences, ‘identity’ is used to refer to one’s social ‘face’. According to psychology, ‘self’ is a multi-dimensional concept that “includes cognitive and affective judgments about ourselves”. Simply put, it is a social construct and “is shaped by interactions with others, and how a person views themselves in relation to their culture, history, gender, class, and more”. In other words, ‘self’ and ‘identity’ are social constructs; they may not be sufficiently understood as entities independent of the dynamic links between the individual and society.

Given the above insights, it is not hard to understand that our collective gut feeling of ‘identity’ has much room for updating and improvement for us to move ahead as a united nation. It’s not difficult to understand that unity is more conducive to social wellbeing than prudish affirmation of our different identities. In particular, Buddhists shouldn’t find it much difficult to understand ‘identity’ as an illusion, because in Buddhism, “The ‘I’ or sense of self is considered an illusion, and is viewed as fluid and ever-changing”. However, many of us Buddhists don’t seem to have taken this illusory nature of self all that seriously. Of course, one may argue, that it is too deep a concept to be grasped by ‘prthagjana’ (not sufficiently enlightened) people. Perhaps the argument is more expedient than sincere, for it can readily be used to silence those who wantonly accuse us of being wicked. Humour apart, surely, we all have among our acquaintances, those who seem to have understood this concept to the extent that they can view ‘identities’ with more detachment thus contributing to enhance a sense of togetherness, at least in their small circles. And, among them are people of all ethnicities and faiths – Buddhists, Christians, Muslims, Hindus and even those who refuse to follow any established religion; the late Dr. E.W. Adikaram comes to mind easily. Our tendency to cling to the rigid cast of ‘self and other’ comes from the habit of finding security in our accustomed ‘comfort zones’. That is, we thrive in the feeling of togetherness in small communes. In other words, being immersed in the feeling of belonging to this or that ethnicity, religion, caste, gender, etc., is too appealing and reassuring to be got rid of with the weapons of knowledge, judgement and reason you acquire as you grow up.

Such cast-iron ‘identity’ jackets we are proud to wear would do little to help forge a more cohesive society. In all these years, we have had little help from our society, its various institutions, cultures, customs and religions to think in terms of an integrated society, despite all the rhetoric and popularized cosmetic programmes that were made to be soothing to the ear and the eye. The uselessness of all these haphazard and dispersed projects often surfaces when our ‘naturalized’ social instincts begin to assert themselves against wiser counsels. Up to the present, all our political potentates have never lost an opportunity to wax inspirational about ‘unity in diversity’. Their sincerity is in public display today, courtesy their spirited scuffles to enter Parliament through National Lists.

Despite their usual bombast on peace building, our past is scattered with loud assertions of our ‘purity of stock’ where political collusion was too apparent to escape notice. We have not forgotten those horror stories about ‘wanda kottu’, ‘wanda sethkam’, etc. – all supposedly ‘neutering missions’ that stirred communal disharmony. Had the years of political sermonizing, pontification, programmes, launched with much sound and fury to purportedly promote ethnic cohesion, been able to make us any less susceptible to our ancestral instincts?

By the way, how about gender-based discrimination, which most of us are unconcerned about? We have enough academic interest in such fields but not much of it goes to help to subdue the persistent feelings of women who feel being oppressed and discriminated. Of course, it goes without saying that not many religions have addressed the social and cultural oppression of women in a ‘language’ which has made any sufficient dent in our deep-rooted gender biases. As we have seen above, it is the same with other forms of oppression that we have perpetuated and unwittingly fostered at our own peril.

Let’s think for a moment about the rumblings felt in some segments of society about their ‘underrepresentation’ in the new government’s power hierarchy. There is no doubt that these are genuine feelings of disaffection coming from their dormant feelings of being subject to discrimination; for example, with regard to Muslim representation and female representation. There is no doubt that it is better for all of us to assuage these deeply felt hurts as they arise in society to create uproar. However, at what level do we have to address them? Surely, not at the highest levels of their visibility and urgency, which has resulted from prolonged neglect. They should be addressed at their most rudimentary levels for us to get rid of these ‘anomalies’.

Instead of thinking of quick fixes, as has been the practice in the past, it is time we grasped the nettle. The solution to women’s problems is not to find a few more slots for them in Parliament and other powerful positions, although it would instantly satisfy the disgruntled parties. The underrepresentation of women in privileged positions is just a sign of the basic problem of their culturally imposed subservience in the family. It’s not different from the subjugation of social groups on the basis of hoary divisions shielded to perpetuate power structures in different parts of the world. For examples, women’s subservient state in the family is extolled by platitudes about their unrestricted maternal love, sacrifice, self-denial, abstinence, etc., which indirectly help their subjugation effected by overtly discriminatory means. In trying to expose the wrappings of India’s age-old caste system, Arundhati Roy says, “it [casteism] has come to be so fused with … so much that is seen to be kind and good—mysticism, spiritualism, non-violence, tolerance, vegetarianism, Gandhi, yoga, backpackers, the Beatles—that, at least to outsiders, it seems impossible to pry it loose and try to understand it.” As for oppressive systems, casteism is not alone in its capacity for working in complicity with most prevalent forms of human engagement. Can’t we see a similar congruence of seemingly uplifting cultural interventions with regard to deifying ‘motherhood’, which obscures the cultural oppression of women in society.

With regard to the current misgivings about underrepresentation in politics attributed to the lack of concern about ethnicity/religion and gender, perhaps easy solutions will be effective in the short term but they are likely to help perpetuate the basic problems crying for a lasting solution. The unsatisfactory visibility of women in higher ranks, in politics or elsewhere, has to be addressed at the roots by taking awareness to the people of the sociocultural character of the issue. Same applies to any unfairness, whether it is perceived by any community – be it concerning the majority or a minority.

The political and social context we find ourselves in today is a good opportunity which shouldn’t be left unexploited, if we don’t wish to postpone any further the possibility of ushering in a more friendly society with less unwarranted enmities.

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.