President’s address at 78th Independence Day

President Anura Kumara Disanayake has acknowledged in his independence day speech that there have been victories and defeats in the post-independence 78 years rule. Great! This is contrary to the rhetorical question “What have the governments after independence done to this nation?” raised in many political platforms. Many, including some intellectuals of this country, subscribe to the idea that the governments after independence did not do anything constructive to this nation. There is no truth in it at all.

We share the common features of poor South Asian nations. If our politicians have destroyed our nation since independence, how is it that we are still the best-performing country among South Asian nations? We had a bout of dangerous JVP extremism, thirty years long deadly terrorism, tsunami, COVID-19, nationalism and racism. Still we are alive and kicking. Thanks to our thinkers, professionals and genuine politicians who worked in the interest of this nation. Only the Rajapaksas were corrupted by greed, even though they had their strength in destroying the deadly terrorism, not others. This Government has its strength in arresting corruption but there is time to assess its progress in other areas.

We need critical thinking. A medical specialist from the Ampara district vehemently criticises the previous Governments. Perhaps he isn’t aware that he was the recipient of the free education system introduced by the late Education Minister Dr C.W.W. Kannangara. He isn’t aware that he was the beneficiary of the district quota system introduced by the late Education Minister Dr. Badiudeen Mohamed to enter the medical faculty. Nor is he aware that the ten acres of paddy land he got as dowry now cost Rs10m per acre because of D. S. Senanayake Samudra (Inginiyagala tank) late Prime Minister D. S. Senanayake built.

To sum up, where do we stand by some standard metrics? According to Human Development Index (HDI), Sri Lanka consistently maintains the highest Human Development Index (HDI) in South Asia. In 2024-25, our country ranked 89th globally, well ahead of regional peers like India and Pakistan. According to Social Indicators, inspite of our economic crises, we maintains high literacy rates (over 92%) and life expectancy (approx. 77 years) that are comparable to more advanced economies. Our income Level is the second-highest GDP per capita in South Asia (after the Maldives), estimated at approximately $4,516 in 2024. The World Bank’s Human Capital Index identifies Sri Lanka as a leader in the region, attributing this success to long-term Government investment in free education and healthcare dating back to the pre-independence.

All politicians shouldn’t be tarred with the same brush, and we shouldn’t undermine our nation.

(The writer is a retired President of National College of Education. He can be reached via email at [email protected].)