SLT-MOBITEL powers Central Bus Stand with end-to-end digital infrastructure

SLT-MOBITEL has once again demonstrated how it brings the belief that technology must serve a clear national purpose into reality. As the National ICT Solutions Provider, SLT-MOBITEL contributed to the recent renovation of the Central Bus Stand, Colombo. The initiative went further than digitising tickets and aimed at transforming the daily travel experience, offering greater convenience, transparency, and predictability to long-distance bus travel. Furthermore, it emphasised SLT-MOBITEL’s efforts in supporting Sri Lanka’s digitally enabled transport journey and advancing citizen‑focused public services.

The newly renovated Central Bus Stand, Colombo was declared open by Hon. Bimal Rathnayaka, Minister of Transport, Highways and Urban Development. It represented a turning point in Sri Lanka’s public transport modernisation.

At the heart of this transformation is SLT-MOBITEL, whose advanced digital solutions have been integrated into the facility to enhance passenger convenience, operational efficiency, and national connectivity. SLT-MOBITEL is committed to building secure, scalable, and citizen-centric digital platforms which strengthen public service delivery across the country.

SLT-MOBITEL delivered connectivity and communication infrastructure services including a digital display solution providing real-time schedules and public messages. A wi-fi solution at the stand provided connectivity across all passenger areas. These benefits of digital access will offer smoother journeys, reliable information, and greater confidence in public transport to thousands of daily commuters.

An Online Bus Ticket Reservation Platform, also known as the Makumbura Pilot Project, was also launched during the event covering the Makumbura–Matara and Makumbura–Galle routes. With particular emphasis on passenger convenience, the platform introduces convenience, dignity, and predictability through the amplified ability to check seat availability, select seats, and avoid long queues. For operators and regulators, it brings transparency, operational visibility, and improved discipline in scheduling and departures.

Post launch planned activities include SLT-MOBITEL actively gathering feedback from passengers, operators, and terminal staff to refine the system, expand routes, and prepare for a potential national rollout. The project is designed to adapt and evolve, emphasising security, scalability and strengthened public service delivery.  Additionally, it is undertaken in close collaboration with the Ministry of Transport, Highways and Urban Development, regulatory authorities, bus operators, NTC and SLTB, and SLT-MOBITEL’s own teams, who worked under tight timelines, to deliver a solution of national importance.

Providing commuters with reliable, accessible, and citizen‑centric journeys during the festive season, passengers can now book long-distance bus seats with ease via www.busticket.gov.lk, self-service kiosks at Makumbura Multimodal Center (MMC) - Kottawa, or the dedicated hotline 011 200 1266, ushering journeys that are convenient, predictable, and commuter-friendly.