NDB Bank celebrates Privilege Centre opening with exclusive client event at Havelock Town branch

In its continued efforts to deliver excellence and sophistication in customer experience, NDB Bank recently hosted an exclusive engagement event for its Privilege clientele of Havelock Town Branch, coinciding with the opening of the newly refurbished NDB Privilege Centre at the Havelock Town Branch. The event marked yet another milestone in the Bank’s journey of elevating service standards and offering refined, personalised banking environments for its high-net-worth customers.

The newly enhanced Privilege Centre is designed to reflect the evolving expectations of the Bank’s most discerning clients, offering greater privacy, comfort, and convenience in an environment curated for focused financial advisory and bespoke banking solutions. This initiative is part of NDB’s broader commitment to continuously invest in infrastructure and experiences that align with its clients’ lifestyles and aspirations.

The exclusive event brought together select members of the Bank’s Privilege segment, offering them the opportunity to explore the upgraded space while engaging with senior bank representatives in a relaxed and elegant setting. The evening was not only a celebration of the Centre’s reopening but also a reaffirmation of NDB’s dedication to fostering meaningful relationships with its valued clients.

Speaking on the occasion, Kelum Edirisinghe, CEO of NDB Bank stated, “At NDB, our Privilege Banking offering is built around understanding and anticipating the needs of our clients. The new PRV Centre at Havelock Town is more than a space, it’s a statement of the standards we uphold and the experience we promise. This event marks our commitment to continue evolving with our customers.”

NDB Privilege Banking continues to stand as a benchmark in personalised financial service, offering a suite of tailored banking, investment, and lifestyle benefits. Through continuous enhancements in service delivery, relationship management, and customer engagement, NDB remains a trusted partner in every moment that matters.

NDB Bank is the fourth-largest listed commercial bank in Sri Lanka. NDB was named Sri Lanka’s Best Bank for Corporates at Euromoney Awards for Excellence 2024 and was awarded Domestic Retail Bank of the Year – Sri Lanka and Sri Lanka Domestic Project Finance Bank of the Year by Asian Banking and Finance Magazine (Singapore) Awards 2024. NDB is the parent company of the NDB Group, comprising capital market subsidiary companies, together forming a unique banking and capital market services group. The Bank is committed to empowering the nation and its people through meaningful financial and advisory services powered by digital banking solutions.

Nations Trust Bank delivers 26% loan growth in 1H 2025 supporting economic revival

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.