Rockland commemorates 101 years with Chairman’s Awards ceremony

Winners across more than 20 categories throughout the Rockland Group recognised for their dedication and service

Carl de Silva Wijeyeratne Challenge Trophy winner Hotel Partnerships Head Dilan Fernando

Leadership Category winner – Liquid Island GM and Brand Communications and PR Group Head Shalindri Malawana (right)

General Manager Category winners – General Manager of Operations Eranda Attanayake (left) and Group Sales and Commercial Strategy General Manager Chathura Ganegoda

Best Sales Channel Leader award presented to National Sales Head Chandana Wijesinghe (right)

Rockland Group recently celebrated its 101st anniversary with the third annual Chairman’s Awards.

The milestone event recognised and celebrated the achievements of exceptional individuals who have contributed to the company’s continued success while upholding its heritage of innovation, quality, and resilience.

Chairman Derek de Silva Wijeyeratne said: “The Chairman’s Awards embody the values that have guided Rockland for over a century of quality, integrity, and teamwork. It is our people who continue to drive our growth and shape our future.”

Group Managing Director Amal de Silva Wijeyeratne added: “This year’s awards reflect our vision of becoming one unified drinks company—moving forward together by partnering, collaborating, and growing as one team.”

The highlight of the evening was the presentation of the Carl de Silva Wijeyeratne Challenge Trophy, to Rockland Hotel Partnerships Head Dilan Fernando for outstanding performance, leadership, and contribution to the group.

The awards also celebrated several other outstanding individuals and teams. In the Leadership Category, Liquid Island GM and Brand Communications and PR Group Head Shalindri Malawana, was recognised for her exceptional leadership in nurturing Rockland’s brands and inspiring her team to deliver consecutive years of double-digit growth in the non-alcohol category. The title of Best Sales Channel Leader was awarded to National Sales Head Chandana Wijesinghe, while the Best Support Function of the Year went to the Human Resources Team in recognition of their vital contribution to Rockland’s people-first culture. In the General Manager Category, two leaders were celebrated for their outstanding work— General Manager of Operations Eranda Attanayake, and Group Sales and Commercial Strategy General Manager Chathura Ganegoda.

The Chairman’s Awards reaffirm Rockland Group’s commitment to recognising talent, fostering innovation, and building a unified vision as the company looks ahead to its next century of growth.