Steering Committee begins post-Ditwah disaster needs assessment

The Government last week launched the national program, ‘Rebuilding Sri Lanka’, a comprehensive initiative designed to coordinate the nation’s recovery from the extensive devastation caused by Cyclone Ditwah.

The meeting was held on 13 January at the Bandaranaike Memorial International Conference Hall (BMICH) under the patronage of President Anura Kumara Dissanayake.

The ‘Rebuilding Sri Lanka’ program will be financed through a multi-pronged strategy. This includes the re-purposing of existing projects, the strategic re-allocation of funds, and the mobilisation of international donor support. A significant financial measure is the planned Rs. 500 billion supplementary estimate for 2026, dedicated to driving the recovery efforts.

To ensure effective and transparent execution, a 25 member Presidential Task Force, chaired by Prime Minister Dr. Harini Amarasuriya, has been established. This Task Force will oversee the entire program through eight dedicated sub committees focusing on critical areas including infrastructure, housing, and livelihood revitalisation.

In conjunction with the national effort, Defence Deputy Minister Major General (Retd.) Aruna Jayasekara, who chairs one of the key sub committees, convened the inaugural Steering Committee Meeting for the Post Disaster Needs Assessment (PDNA) on 14 January at his office. The PDNA Steering Committee provides strategic direction and ensures alignment with national priorities.

The Steering Committee, comprising key Government agencies and development partners, engaged in detailed discussions on establishing a robust framework for the assessment, the governance structure of the PDNA process, and establishing an effective coordination mechanism.

The Committee agreed on a detailed timeline to produce a comprehensive PDNA report with precise estimates for damage, economic loss, and recovery needs across vital sectors such as Housing and Settlements; Health and Nutrition; Agriculture, Tourism, Industry and Commerce; Irrigation, Transport, Water and Sanitation, Electricity; Environment, Employment/Livelihood, and Disaster Risk Reduction; and Governance, Gender, and Social Inclusion.

A significant portion of the discussion focused on addressing the challenges within the PDNA process, including the need for improved inter-<inisterial coordination, lack of awareness, and delays in obtaining accurate data.

The Defence Deputy Minister conveyed his sincere appreciation to the development partners for their commitment and assured the Government’s fullest support in achieving the national objectives. He further emphasised the importance of a unified approach for a swift and resilient recovery.

The meeting was attended by the UN Resident Coordinator in Sri Lanka, the Director General and senior officials of the Disaster Management Centre (DMC), representatives from the European Union (EU), the World Bank (WB), the Asian Development Bank (ADB), the UN Development Programme (UNDP), the Asian Disaster Preparedness Centre (ADPC), UN agencies, and the National Planning Department (NPD).