Planters’ Association welcomes new President AKD; calls for collaborative efforts

The Planters’ Association of Ceylon (PA) yesterday via a statement congratulated the National People’s Power (NPP) leader Anura Kumara Dissanayake on his election as the 9th Executive President of Sri Lanka and called for renewed collaboration to secure sustainable growth and livelihood empowerment within the plantation sector.

The Association called on President Dissanayake to initiate a transformative era for the plantation industry by prioritising stakeholder engagement in policymaking, which is crucial for advancing sustainable development and fostering crop diversification. By actively involving all stakeholders, the Government can establish a comprehensive policy framework that bolsters the long-term viability and growth of the plantation sector.

“The PA remains confident that, under the new leadership, collaborative efforts can help resolve the prevailing issues and unlock the full potential of Sri Lanka’s plantation sector,” said PA Secretary General Lalith Obeyesekere. “We are committed to supporting the Government in implementing forward thinking policies for long term sustainability and prosperity.” “Key areas such as diversification and modernisation will require strong Government support to thrive,” he further stated.

“The plantation industry is currently grappling with significant challenges that require focused attention and proactive measures. One critical concern is the urgent need for diversification. As market dynamics shift, the ability to cultivate other crops becomes increasingly important. However, recent policy hurdles have impeded progress in these areas, limiting the sector’s potential for growth. By fostering a supportive environment for diversification, the Government can enhance the resilience of the plantation industry and strengthen its contribution to the national economy.”

“The PA extends its best wishes to President Anura Kumara Dissanayake and is committed to assist his administration in promoting initiatives that enhance the plantation industry and foster the country’s economic growth.”