Dialog launches country’s first smartphone plan available to all Sri Lankans

Dialog Axiata PLC, Sri Lanka’s #1 connectivity provider, introduces ‘Smartphone Plans’ – the nation’s first installment plan, designed to offer all Sri Lankans a convenient and affordable solution for purchasing the latest Android smartphones.

This innovative plan enables customers to own the latest Android smartphones by paying just 40% upfront, with the balance conveniently spread over 24 months and integrated into their Dialog Power Plan Postpaid mobile bill.

Prepaid customers can also upgrade to the Postpaid Power Plan while retaining their existing mobile numbers to avail themselves of this benefit. Additionally, the plan is available through Lesi Pay, allowing Prepaid customers with credit ratings to enjoy flexible payment options and access to the latest technology.

This initiative empowers customers to choose their preferred smartphone, bundled with their Power Plan monthly bill, with device installments and monthly Power Plan rentals starting as low as LKR 3,298/-. The process is seamless, allowing customers to visit any Dialog Experience Centre and leave with a new Android device.

Dialog’s latest initiative not only simplifies the acquisition of the latest technology but also plays a critical role in fostering digital inclusion. By facilitating easier access to cutting-edge devices, Dialog continues to empower Sri Lankans across the country, helping them stay connected and informed. This initiative underscores Dialog’s unwavering commitment to driving digital transformation and enhancing the quality of life for its customers.

Reduction in market interest rates expected to be passed on to customers – CBSL Governor

IBSL and Pan Asia Bank unite to elevate practical training in banking education

Sri Lanka’s Para athletes shine at World Para Athletics Championships

Telin and Dialog Axiata ink strategic partnership to manage international voice and SMS termination

Genie Business Powered by Dialog Finance unveils Cutting-Edge Fintech Solutions for Sri Lankan MSMEs

Dialog recognised for Excellence in Sustainability Reporting at ACCA Awards 2023

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.