Keells Nexus introduces an all new Loyalty App, marking a new era of connected, everyday rewards

Keells is set to usher a new chapter in customer experience with the relaunch of Keells Nexus with the introduction of its all-new loyalty app on 13th February. For 25 years, Keells Nexus has been at the heart of Sri Lankan retail, pioneering coalition loyalty and even introducing mobile-based loyalty as early as 2014. The loyalty program is building on this legacy, combining state-of-the-art technology with richer, more personalized rewards and seamless integration across the Keells ecosystem with an intuitive mobile experience.

Today, Keells Nexus stands at over 2 million registered members, a reflection of the trust customers place in Keells and the brand’s commitment to improving the quality of life for the nation. The launch further strengthens Keells’ long-standing focus on tech-enabled retail efficiency, following innovative retail experiences to customers such as self-checkout counters and retail technology that drives efficiency such as advanced inventory management systems.

The new app therefore is the next logical step in this journey, bringing together rewards, offers, and account visibility in one intuitive, streamlined interface. The new Keells Nexus app brings together all deals, savings and partner offers in one place, giving customers complete visibility and control. Members can track their points in real time, scan a QR code at checkout to earn rewards instantly, and enjoy a more personalised, more connected shopping experience.

“At the heart of Keells Nexus is a simple but powerful belief that life is better when we’re connected,” said Nilusha Fernando Head of Marketing, Keells Supermarkets & Senior Vice President, John Keells Group. “The ‘us’ in Nexus represents the families we serve, the communities we’re part of, and the everyday moments that matter. This app brings our purpose to life by helping customers save more, enjoy exclusive rewards and feel part of a caring, loyal community.”

To deliver this next-generation platform, Keells partnered with Apadmi—an industry leader in mobile technology renowned for building high-performance apps for global brands. The strategic partnership with Salesforce and Cyntexa ensured an optimum back end functionality for the launch of this app.

“Working with Apadmi has been an incredible learning experience,” added Osanda Warnekulasooriya the Head of IT, Retail Sector and Senior Vice President, John Keells Group. “We collaborated with true mobile experts gaining valuable insights not only into product development, but also best practices in sprint planning, UX, and digital architecture. Their expertise has helped us build a loyalty platform that’s designed for scale, simplicity and future innovation. The Collaborative partnership that included Salesforce and Cyntexa ensured that the backend systems were in place to support the launch and operationalization of the app”.

Apadmi expressed equal enthusiasm for the partnership and the vision behind the project.

Mark Collin, Chief Growth Officer at Apadmi said: “We’re really proud to partner with Keells, which has a strong culture of innovation. Nexus Rewards is shaping the future of digital services and our goal was to create an app which elevates loyalty through both rewards value, as well as a genuinely engaging experience. The team work and collaboration between continents has been a joy to behold and we’re excited to see how the platform evolves and further strengthens the relationship between Keells and its customers.”

Nestlé Lanka Named Among Sri Lanka’s Top 10 Employers at EFC National Best Employer Awards 2025

ComBank makes history as first bank in Sri Lanka to enable Google Pay for Mastercard cardholders

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.