Unbridled freedom of the hitman

The legal fraternity is up in arms over last week’s murder of a lawyer and his wife in a Colombo suburb. On 13 February, two gunmen shot lawyer Buddhika Mallawarachchi and his wife Nisansala dead inside their car near a supermarket at Akuregoda, where the Defence Headquarters Complex is located. The killers used a T-56 assault rifle and a pistol in the attack. There was absolutely no need for an assault rifle to kill the unarmed victims. Those who ordered the killing may have sought to make the attack as spectacular as possible, probably to send a chilling message to others.

The Bar Association of Sri Lanka (BASL) sprang into action, cranking up pressure on the government and the police to bring the killers to justice forthwith. It resorted to a one-day boycott of court proceedings in protest, urging the government to ensure the safety of lawyers and the public. The BASL reaction jolted the police into arresting some suspects with underworld links.

Hardly a day passes in this country without a shooting incident that snuffs out a life or two. Last year saw about 114 shooting incidents, which reportedly claimed 60 lives. About seven persons have been shot dead so far this year, according to media reports. The police have pathetically failed to prevent crime. They are busy doing political work for the incumbent government to the extent of making one wonder whether they have any time left for their regular duties and functions, including crime prevention. The CID is apparently labouring under the misconception that its raison d’etre is to protect the interests of the incumbent government and its members.

The police have drawn heavy flak for seeking to muddy the water over Friday’s killings by making some claims that have been construed as attempts to blame underworld rivalry for the double murder and imply that Mallawarachchi had underworld links. They may have sought to use their stock excuse of underworld rivalries in a bid to cover up their failure to neutralise the organised criminal gangs.

Attempts are made in some quarters to turn public opinion against lawyers who defend drug dealers, rapists, homicidal killers and other such criminals. It is a well-established legal principle that every person accused of a criminal offence has the right to be represented by a lawyer. This constitutes one of the core safeguards of a fair trial. The idea is to prevent offenders from being denied a proper opportunity to defend themselves, often through counsel, and condemned. Since the accused are presumed innocent until proven guilty, they must have a full chance to defend themselves, including through legal counsel. After all, the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights recognises the right of an accused to have legal assistance. So, no lawyer should be vilified for representing any offender, even if the latter has perpetrated a heinous crime. There have been instances where lawyers refused to appear for some criminals. Such action violates the aforesaid legal principle.

Some government ministers have claimed that the incidents, such as the killing of Mallawarachchi and his wife, are isolated ones that cannot be considered threats to national security. They are being overly pedantic about the distinction between public security and national security. Obviously, public security and national security are different though the differences between them are often taken for granted. Technically, public security concerns the safety of citizens whereas national security concerns the protection of the state from major strategic threats. However, governments in this country use public security and national security interchangeably when it serves their purpose. According to the Protection of the State from Terrorism Bill, even public security issues are treated as threats to national security. The Prevention of Terrorism Act, which was introduced to protect the state and national security, is used to arrest and detain offenders who can be dealt with under ordinary laws.

The government and the police must get their act together instead of splitting hairs and trying to obfuscate the real issue of growing vulnerability of the public vis-à-vis the rise of the underworld.

With criminal gangs becoming more powerful and demonstrating their ability to strike anywhere at will, and with the police failing to prevent crime, what the situation would be if the LTTE were still active militarily is anyone’s guess.

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.