TNA to evaluate candidates before endorsing Presidential contender

TNA MP M.A. Sumanthiran announces party will decide which candidate to support at Presidential elections after discussions with all contenders

Denies reports suggesting TNA might back SJB leader Sajith Premadasa

TNPF leader Gajendrakumar Ponnambalam calls for Tamil community to boycott SL’s Presidential election

Emphasises boycotting elections would send a strong message to Govt. reflecting community’s rejection of participation under current conditions

Tamil National Alliance (TNA) MP M.A. Sumanthiran announced yesterday that the party will decide which candidate to support in the upcoming presidential election after holding discussions with all the main contenders.

Speaking to the media, Sumanthiran said the party will evaluate the proposed programs of the candidates and engage in discussions with them. “The final decision will be made following these meetings,” he said.

When asked about reports suggesting the TNA might back SJB leader Sajith Premadasa at the Presidential elections, Sumanthiran denied the claim. He also mentioned that the party has not considered fielding a Tamil candidate in the election.

Meanwhile, the Tamil National People’s Front (TNPF), led by MP Gajendrakumar Ponnambalam, has called for a boycott of the upcoming Presidential election by the Tamil community. The TNPF urged Tamils to abstain from voting until their aspirations are addressed.

“The Sri Lankan Government views the Tamil homeland as hostile,” the statement read. “They continue with Buddhization, militarization, and structural genocide in our homeland. As long as they maintain majority control, they will treat Tamils not as citizens, but as adversaries.”

The TNPF emphasised that boycotting the election would send a strong message to the Government, demonstrating that the Tamils reject participation under current conditions.

The TNPF outlined two possible paths for resolving the island’s ethnic conflict: either suppressing the Tamils and forcing them to abandon their pursuit of a political solution, or honestly addressing the situation and offering a permanent political resolution.