PC polls in limbo amidst govt.’s mumbo jumbo

The JVP-NPP government finds itself in an unenviable position over the Provincial Council (PC) polls, which have been in abeyance for nearly a decade. In the late 1980s, the JVP plunged the country into a bloodbath in a bid to prevent the establishment of the PCs, which it said would endanger the territorial integrity of the country. Today, it has a two-thirds majority in Parliament and its leader Anura Kumara Dissanayake is the Executive President. It is therefore well positioned to carry out its promise to do away with the PCs. After all, some election monitors have called upon it either to hold the delayed PC polls or to consider abolishing the PCs. It has chosen to do neither. Its leaders who vowed to liberate this country from India, which created the PC system, are seen pressing the flesh with the Indian leaders.

The Tamil National Alliance (TNA) has accused the JVP-NPP government of trying to use a parliamentary select committee (PSC) to delay the PC polls further. TNA MP Shanakiyan Rasamanickam has reportedly opposed a government plan to bring the PCs within the remit of a new PSC. He has pointed out that a PSC on the PCs already exists, and the duplication of the PSC process will only lead to confusion and create conditions for the PC polls to be further delayed.

MP Rasamanickam’s fear is not unfounded. It is obvious that the government is not ready for an election. Otherwise, it would have amended the PC Elections Act, enabling the Election Commission to hold the PC polls under the Proportional Representation system soon. All signs are that it will do everything in its power to avoid an electoral contest this year. Its fear of elections has given the lie to its claim that its approval rating has improved.

The TNA is not alone in urging the government to hold long-delayed PC elections. The SJB, the SLPP, the SLFP and the UNP are also demanding that the PC polls be held immediately. All these political parties facilitated the passage of an extremely bad Bill to amend the PC Elections Act in 2017, thereby helping the UNP-led Yahapalana government postpone the PC polls . They ought to tender an apology for that blatantly undemocratic act.

It may be recalled that the TNA, the SLFP, the JVP and the Joint Opposition, consisting of the SLFP dissidents who subsequently formed the SLPP were prominent among the parties that enabled the ratification of the aforesaid shockingly awful Christmas tree Bill loaded with more committee-stage amendments than its original text. The SJB stalwarts were in the UNP in 2017 and voted for that bad Bill, which was not consistent with Article 78 (3) of the Constitution: “Any amendment proposed to a Bill in Parliament shall not deviate from the merits and principles of such Bill.”

Meanwhile, JVP General Secretary Tilvin Silva has denied reports that the government is under pressure from India to hold the PC polls. He visited India recently and met Indian External Affairs Minister S. Jaishankar. However, one may recall that in April 2025, Indian Prime Minister Narendra Modi himself publicly urged Sri Lanka to hold the delayed PC polls. At the UNHRC session in Geneva in September 2025, an Indian delegation repeated Modi’s call. India has done so under pressure from Tamil Nadu.

Statements made by Tilvin, who is widely seen as the eminence grise of the ruling JVP-NPP coalition, are generally considered authoritative. If the NPP government is not under Indian pressure to ensure that the PCs will have elected representatives soon, the question is whether the Modi government has taken the Tamil Nadu politicians for a ride.

If the NPP government is not afraid of facing the public, it can amend the current PC election laws and hold the PC polls without taking cover behind the delimitation process, which is likely to drag on indefinitely. Mere rhetoric won’t suffice.

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.