Sri Lanka Gem and Jewellery Association congratulates President AKD; looks for progressive steps

The Sri Lanka Gem and Jewellery Association (SLGJA), the apex body and the voice of the country’s gem and jewellery industry, in a statement yesterday extended heartfelt congratulations to Anura Kumara Dissanayake on being sworn in as the 9th President of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka.

It said as an industry that has long been an integral part of Sri Lanka’s rich cultural heritage and economic strength, SLGJA is confident that under the new President’s visionary leadership, the nation will continue to thrive and reach new heights of prosperity. His commitment to progress, national unity, and the well-being of all Sri Lankans aligns closely with the values and aspirations of the Gem and Jewellery sector, which remains a foundation of both the country’s identity and its economy.

Insightful discussions that were held with Dissanayake and senior members of the party before the elections, where the party understood the unique challenges and opportunities faced by the gem and jewellery industry has given great confidence in Dissanayake’s leadership and the bright future that lies ahead for the gem and jewellery sector.

The gem and jewellery industry plays a vital role in enhancing Sri Lanka’s global reputation. SLGJA is eager to work closely with President Dissanayake’s administration to further develop and promote this key industry. “Together, more opportunities for sustainable growth could be created, increasing the international competitiveness, and ensure the long-term success of the industry for future generations,” SLGJA said.

It expressed confidence that the new President’s administration will continue to take progressive steps to support and strengthen industries that contribute significantly to the national economy. The SLGJA stands ready to assist in any initiatives that foster economic development, promote exports, and elevate Sri Lanka’s standing as a global leader in the gem and jewellery trade.

The statement said SLGJA is built on a vision to empower Sri Lanka’s Gem and Jewellery industry through innovation and sustainability superiority which aims to generate global recognition whilst upholding the rich heritage for future generations. SLGJA’s mission is to alleviate Sri Lanka’s Gem and Jewellery Industry through ethical practices, facilitate market access, advocate sustainable sourcing and nurture talent for the industry’s continued growth, global competitiveness and socio economic contribution. Functioning as the advocate for Sri Lanka’s gem and jewellery sector, the SLGJA lobbies the industry related concerns to governmental and other related bodies. SLGJA is also the organiser of FACETS Sri Lanka International Gem and Jewellery Show over 31 years which is now the cornerstone for the industry players, fostering collaboration, innovation and international partnerships.

“Once again, we congratulate His Excellency on his well-deserved election victory and wish him every success in his first term. May his leadership bring peace, prosperity, and progress to all Sri Lankans,” the SLGJA statement added.