Workshop on “21 powerful Japanese methods to create organisation excellence”

The National Chamber of Commerce of Sri Lanka (NCCSL) has scheduled an insightful workshop titled “21 powerful Japanese methods to create organisation excellence” on Thursday 22 August from 9 a.m. to 12:30 p.m. at the National Chamber Auditorium.

Sunil G. Wijesinha will be the resource person for this session, who is a well–known promoter of Japanese Techniques and Productivity. He is recognised as the pioneer who implemented many Japanese Techniques in Sri Lanka from as far back as 1980. He has followed many training programs in Japan. He is a past President of Japan Sri Lanka Technical & Cultural Association (JASTECA) and a past Chairman of JASTECA Trust. He received the APO Regional Award for promoting productivity in the Asia Pacific region. Last year the Government of Japan conferred on him the “Order of the Rising Sun, Gold and Silver Rays” for promoting relations between Japan and Sri Lanka by promoting Japanese management techniques in Sri Lanka.

The scope of the session would be focused on the amazing story of Japan’s rise from misery to prosperity after World war ІІ, useful elements of Japanese Culture including 21 Powerful methods and work practices such as Omotenashi, Kireizuki, Mottainai, Ohno Circle, etc. Japanese Management Techniques, Work Practices and Habits, have proved extremely beneficial to create a unique work culture which will enhance Customer Orientation, Productivity and Quality of products and services. Adopting these work practices and methods in an organisation will lead to excellence.

This workshop would be beneficial to a wide spectrum of audience representing the top management CEOs, COOs, Department Heads, Managers, Executives and Trainees, in any type of organisation such as manufacturing, Service, Government, SOEs, Education and Military. Each participant will receive a certificate of participation upon completion of the workshop.

The National Chamber of Commerce of Sri Lanka invites the interested participants to register for this insightful session. The workshop will be followed by a Q & A session as well.

Registration details: Contact Hansi / Nishanthi/ Tharushi at 077 3678728, 076 2555707, 011 4 741 788 or email [email protected]; [email protected].

Registration will be accepted till 5 p.m. Tuesday 20 August 2024.