Pathfinder Foundation conducts diplomatic dialogue on energy independence and security

Pathfinder Foundation Chairman Bernard Goonetilleke (centre) chairs the session, featuring a presentation by Sri Lanka Sustainable Energy Authority Director-General Harsha Wickramasinghe. Panellists include Ministry of Finance former Secretary Dr. R.H.S. Samarathunga, and Ceylon Petroleum Corporation former Chairman Saliya Wickramasuriya

Representatives of diplomats and international organisations, government and non-governmental institutions, research bodies, and universities

The Pathfinder Foundation hosted the sixth session of its “Dialogue with Diplomats” series, at the Courtyard by Marriott, Colombo. The session centred on the theme “Energy Independence and Security for Sri Lanka”.

It brought together a distinguished gathering of diplomats, representatives from international organisations, key Sri Lankan government and non-governmental institutions, research bodies, and universities.

The dialogue emphasised the importance of energy security, as this sector critically influences the economic and political decisions of a country. Heavy reliance on a single source of energy poses a greater risk to economic stability and security, as demonstrated by the unprecedented economic crisis in Sri Lanka, which highlighted its vulnerability to external shocks. The dialogue highlighted the urgent need to diversify energy sources and pursue policies to achieve long-term energy sovereignty.

The event provided a platform to share insights, identify policy options, and strengthen partnerships for Sri Lanka’s transition towards a renewable and secure energy future. These policy options were extensively discussed in detail, with a focus on mobilising Sri Lanka’s renewable resources such as solar, wind power, and biomass through international cooperation and public and private participation.

The discussion also emphasised the numerous obstacles and shortcomings Sri Lanka will encounter in its efforts to attain energy security goals. The significance of international dialogue and trilateral cooperation to alleviate the financial strain of implementing these projects was deemed essential.

The clarity with which the various aspects of this topic were highlighted, combined with the audience’s active engagement, contributed to the event’s success. The Pathfinder Foundation will continue to promote dialogue between diplomats and industry experts, aiming to steer Sri Lanka towards a sustainable and prosperous future.

The session, chaired by Pathfinder Foundation Chairman Bernard Goonetilleke, featured a presentation by Sri Lanka Sustainable Energy Authority Director-General Harsha Wickramasinghe. Panellists included Ministry of Finance former Secretary Dr. R.H.S. Samarathunga, and Ceylon Petroleum Corporation former Chairman Saliya Wickramasuriya.