August 2024 tourist arrivals hit 1.2 million; major promotional drives taking shape

The Sri Lanka Tourism Promotion Bureau (SLTPB) disclosed that 1.2 million tourists arrived in the country by August 24 and plans are afoot to launch campaigns in key markets to generate increased numbers for the next winter season.

‘The current main markets that generate these numbers were identified as originating in India, Russia, UK, China and Germany.

‘A few new markets have also been identified, like Australia and the US, chairman, Sri Lanka Tourism Promotion Bureau, Chalaka Gajabahu, told a media conference held at the Sri Lanka Tourism office in Colombo last Friday.

Gajabahu added: ‘We are confident of achieving the target of 2.3 million arrivals this year and aim to target 3 million next year, following the PR and digital campaigns scheduled to kick off this September.

‘The first phase of the campaign will be held during the second week of September targeting the main markets of UK, France, Germany, China and India. An investment of Rs.1.6 billion will be allocated for this purpose, with Rs.600 million to be spent on the PR campaign and Rs.1 billion on the digital campaign.’

Meanwhile, SLTPB Managing Director Nalin Perera said that the authorities are currently calling for tenders to schedule the second stage of the PR and digital campaign to be held in the markets of Russia, Australia, Scandinavia and the UAE. In this stage of the campaign the authorities will be allocating Rs.450 million for the PR campaign and Rs.750 million for the digital campaign.

‘In addition, an Asian Development Bank funded information application will be launched in October that will provide a wide range of information for tourists visiting the country, he said.

‘The “Seeing is Believing” campaign that generated over US$550 million worth of media publicity for Sri Lanka Tourism soon after the economic crisis, continued into 2024 with 58 foreign media, including travel influencers and bloggers, visiting the country, Perera explained.

‘Among the main promotional activities were the 16 international travel shows, such as ITB-Germany, FITU-Spain, ATM-Dubai, IFTM- France, SATTE – India, BIT- Milan, GITF – China, among others that were attended along with the local travel industry. There were also 16 roadshows organized in India, China, Australia and Turkey, Perera added.

Building a sustainable future: The impact of RPCs on Sri Lanka’s economy and environment

Ravi K sees a digitalized bureaucracy as the future of Sri Lanka

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.