Handunnetti apologises to Elon Musk over misquoted remarks

National People’s Power (NPP) Economic Council member Sunil Handunnetti apologised to South African businessman and investor Elon Musk over the weekend, clarifying that his remarks about Musk were misquoted on social media platforms.

At a business forum organised by the party, Handunnetti refuted claims that he labelled Musk as an Economic Hitman, emphasising that his comments at a previous event in Badulla were misconstrued and disseminated, particularly on social media platforms.

The former MP said he had never intended to call Musk an “Economic Hitman”.

“What I meant was that due to the lack of law, discipline, and rampant political interference in businesses, world-renowned and recognised investors and businessmen will not come to Sri Lanka. It doesn’t matter if President Ranil Wickremesinghe or anyone else invites them; they simply won’t come,” he explained.

“Earlier, during Ranil Wickremesinghe’s governance, there were investors who came, but they were not engaged in fair business practices,” he noted.

According to Handunnetti, he was referring to businessmen such as South African Casino Mogul James Packer and Hungarian-American billionaire hedge fund manager George Soros. “They aren’t recognised as fair businessmen but rather as Economic Hitmen,” he said.

However, Handunnetti clarified that he never regarded Elon Musk as an economic hitman and extended his apologies to anyone, including Musk, who may have been offended by his remarks. “Sri Lanka must create an environment that allows such fair businessmen to invest in the country,” he emphasised.

The misinterpreted comments drew widespread criticism from various quarters. Addressing a Jayagamu Sri Lanka event on Saturday, Labour Minister Manusha Nanayakkara slammed Handunnetti’s comments.

He said that Elon Musk is not an economic hitman but a visionary entrepreneur who has revolutionised the global business landscape. He emphasised that the populace should be pleased that a businessman of Musk’s calibre is considering investing in Sri Lanka, as this would bring technological advancements and enable rural areas to connect to the internet through the Starlink satellite network.

He further noted that the same group spreading misinformation about Musk had previously propagated false information about Uma Oya. “They do not want our youth to connect to the world, become globalised, and develop. This is why they are labelling Elon Musk as an economic hitman,” he remarked.