PAFFREL slams Govt. attempt to utilise public funds to retain power

PAFFREL Executive Director Rohana Hettiarachchi urges Govt. to refrain from introducing any amendments that would necessitate a referendum

Questions why Govt. is attempting to introduce an amendment that would require a referendum costing Rs. 10 b if the economic crisis is ongoing

Says unacceptable for Govt. to propose amendments leading to a referendum when LG polls were postponed due to lack of funds

Clarifies 22A cannot delay elections or necessitate a referendum before the Presidential poll

People’s Action for Free and Fair Elections (PAFFREL) Executive Director Rohana Hettiarachchi has accused the Government of attempting to use public funds to maintain its hold on power amidst the ongoing economic crisis.

During a media briefing yesterday, Hettiarachchi urged the Government, led by the President, to refrain from introducing any amendments that would necessitate a referendum at this time.Referring to President Ranil Wickremesinghe’s recent statement to Local Government representatives about postponing the Local Government elections to focus on rebuilding the country, Hettiarachchi questioned the Government’s priorities. “If the economic crisis is ongoing, why is the Government attempting to introduce an amendment that would require a referendum costing Rs. 10 billion?” he asked.

He also said it is unacceptable for the Government to propose amendments leading to a referendum when the Local Government elections have been postponed due to a lack of funds. “This demonstrates that, even amidst an economic crisis, the rulers are continuing to spend the country’s money on a project aimed at retaining power,” he accused.

In an attempt to dispel any doubts among the public, Hettiarachchi clarified that the 22nd Amendment to the Constitution cannot delay elections or necessitate a referendum before the Presidential election. “Therefore, the country’s citizens should not retain any doubts on the matter,” he said.