Prime Group conducts skill development program for PM’s Security Division

Prime Group hosted a special program at the Prime Minister’s Office recently. The program aimed to enhance the knowledge and skills of all the officers serving in the Prime Minister’s Security Division.

The programme, conducted by Dr. Krishantha Pathiraja, a respected academic and corporate leader, focused on key areas including communication, public relations, leadership, and motivation.

Nearly 320 officers participated, including Deputy Inspector General of Police, Jagath Wishantha, who commands the Prime Minister’s Security Division, and Superintendent of Police, Sumithra de Silva.

Prime Group has consistently supported programs benefitting the country and society. As a private sector leader, the company has since inception, continuously sponsored initiatives to strengthen public service, without distinction between the public and private sectors.

As part of these series, Prime Group has already extended efforts beyond the Prime Minister’s Security Division, conducting programs with mayors as well as provincial councils and local government institutions to strengthen public service efficiency. Each of these initiatives has been met with resounding success, and Prime Group is committed to continuing the momentum, with similar programs planned to further enhance and improve the nation’s public service.

Commenting on the initiative, Prime Group Co-Chairperson Sandamini Perera noted she is deeply committed to contribute such programs as a way of giving back to Sri Lankan society, the very community whose support has been integral to the company’s success.

She added, “Prime as a company has earned and built on the trust of the people, and we believe in giving priority to undertake activities to benefit society. Public service as a mechanism and plays a vital role in improving lives.Supporting programs which strengthen it is both timely and essential. We are extremely happy to contribute in such a manner.”