Hot Chocolate …heating up the scene

Whenever I think of Hot Chocolate, I’m reminded of the British soul band Hot Chocolate who had several hits, including ‘Everyone’s a Winner,’ ‘You Sexy Thing’ and ‘It Started With a Kiss.’

Well, guess what! We, too, have in our midst Hot Chocolate…yes, of course, the drink, and a music group, as well.

In fact, Hot Chocolate has been around, in our scene, for over five years.

They describe themselves as a driving force in Sri Lanka’s music scene…with a string of hit songs and electrifying live performances, that has captivated audiences with a unique blend of multiple genres of music.

The name Hot Chocolate, they say, originated from their lead vocalist, Tehan Perera’s unyielding love for the warm, comforting beverage.

Their journey began in 2016, when they started jamming together, crafting original songs that captured the Sri Lankan spirit.

Tracks like ‘Kunu,’ ‘Kehelmala,’ and ‘Hapanna Bari Atha’ were early expressions of their sound, they say, adding that over the past five years they have performed at some of Sri Lanka’s prestigious concerts and music festivals.

The band highlights include a collaborated with Shihan Mihiranga, where, together, they co-organized the concert ‘Dreamz of Shihan,’ and a tour of Australia.

During the pandemic lockdown, unable to perform live, they came up with the concert ‘Hot Chocolate Party’ on YouTube.

They also mentioned that one unforgettable event was their Valentine’s Day concert, ‘Love and Promises,’

Raffealla Fernando: Did the needfulas photographer for the HotChocolate album ‘Anuragaye’

Partnering with Kandos, they created a magical evening that perfectly captured the romantic spirit of the day. The concert was held outdoors and drew a massive crowd of over 6,000.

Their plans for the future, they say, will include Original Music Creation, Live Show Development and International Exposure.

Referring to International Exposure, they say it may involve participating in international music showcases, collaborating with foreign artistes, and signing up with international record labels.

A spokesperson for Hot Chocolate said: “We believe our music has the potential to resonate with a global audience. Hot Chocolate is committed to these goals and is actively working towards achieving them. We are confident that through dedication and hard work, we will establish ourselves as a leading force in the Sri Lankan music scene…and beyond.”

Last Friday (31 May) Hot Chocolate released their latest album ‘Anuragaye,’ made up of five tracks, with videos for each song, and it was done in a very professional manner, with the well-known celebrity photographer Raffealla Fernando coming into the scene, as well.

Hot Chocolate is made up of Tehan Perera (vocals), Dasun Madushan (vocals), Kasun Welgamage (guitar), Dishad Lankesh (vocals/guitar), Dilshan Samuek (keyboards), Tharindu Bimsara (Drums) and Niman Anne (bass).

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.