French heat wave death toll rises to 2025

(BBC) - France has said it recorded an increase of more than 2,000 deaths during the last week of a record-breaking European heatwave in June as forecasters warn of further extreme temperatures on the continent in the next few days.

Deaths rose 29% in the last week of June compared to the week before, with French health minister Stéphanie Rist adding there had been a "clear increase" in deaths among those over 45.

France saw its hottest day ever on average country-wide on 24 June, with temperatures hitting almost 41C in Paris and half the nation placed under a red heat alert.

News of the death toll comes with parts of Europe, including the UK, braced for more searing temperatures from this weekend.

BBC Weather says a large area of high pressure is currently building from the Azores towards Portugal and Spain and that by the weekend, heat is forecast to climb across France and southern Britain.

And as Europe braces for sweltering conditions, millions of Americans celebrating the July Fourth holiday weekend are already being affected by prolonged extreme heat and high humidity in parts of the central and eastern US.

Climate change is driving up temperatures around the world - but particularly in Europe. It is the fastest warming continent, heating up twice as fast as the global average, according to the Copernicus climate service.

This is causing increased summer heatwaves, greater pressure on Europe's water supply, and more intense wildfires.

Belgium recorded 1,222 excess deaths during the heatwave – 39% more than usual – with almost half being people aged 85 and over.

The country's health ministry said the number of deaths during a heatwave was "unprecedented".

In France, the number of deaths recorded between 22 and 28 June increased by 2,025 - nearly 30%, the Public Health France agency announced on Friday. Deaths rose by 62% in the Paris region alone.

The French health ministry said the figure was likely an "underestimate" and mortality would "therefore be higher than these initial figures".

Drowning deaths soared during the heatwave, with French Interior Minister Laurent Nuñez saying on Saturday that 72 people had died by drowning since 18 June.

Meanwhile, unprecedented heat in the Netherlands last week led to about 480 excess deaths, Dutch authorities said on Thursday - most of whom were aged 80 and older.