Dialog recognised as Sri Lanka’s Most Loved Service and Telecommunications Brand for third consecutive year

Dialog Axiata PLC, Sri Lanka’s #1 connectivity provider, has once again been recognised as Sri Lanka’s Most Loved Brand in the Service and Telecommunications sectors, while also ranking among the top Corporate Brands in the LMD Brands Annual. Marking its third consecutive year at the top of both categories, the recognition reflects the company’s commitment to enriching Sri Lankan lives and enterprises through technology, while creating value for customers, communities and the nation.

The accolades were awarded through the LMD Brands Annual survey, conducted independently by PepperCube Consultants on behalf of Media Services. Based on responses from 400 readers across Sri Lanka, representing a broad demographic and geographic mix, the survey identified the brands that resonated most strongly with consumers in terms of trust, loyalty and brand affinity.

Lasantha Theverapperuma, Group Chief Marketing Officer of Dialog Axiata PLC said, “Being recognised as Sri Lanka’s Most Loved Brand across both the Service and Telecommunications sectors is a meaningful endorsement of the trust and confidence that Sri Lankans continue to place in Dialog. This recognition reflects our commitment to understanding and serving the evolving needs of our customers while expanding access to digital connectivity, services and opportunities. As we continue to innovate and grow, we remain focused on creating value for communities and supporting Sri Lanka’s digital and socioeconomic progress.”

The recognition also reflects Dialog’s continued focus on innovation, customer-centricity and investments that support Sri Lanka’s digital future, including expanded 5G connectivity, AI-powered digital experiences and broader access to digital services.

Beyond connectivity, Dialog continues to support communities, livelihoods and the environment through initiatives such as Govi Mithuru, which provides AI-driven agricultural advisory services to over one million farmers, and Shishyadhara, which has enabled subsidy distribution to more than 450,000 underprivileged students. The company also continues to advance its Net Zero 2050 ambition through energy optimisation, renewable energy adoption and the expansion of solar-powered network infrastructure.

Further underscoring the brand’s standing among Sri Lankan consumers, Dialog was also recognised as the ‘Service Brand of the Year’ for the fifth time and the ‘Telecommunication Brand of the Year’ for the 15th consecutive year at the SLIM-KANTAR People’s Awards 2026.

The Council for Business with Britain appoints Ameena Ziauddin president at 26th Annual General Meeting

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.