OrphanCare and AAA Industries forge partnership

Marshad Barry - Deputy Head Orphan Care handing over the Trust’s Impact Report 2025 to C.M. Noohu – Director AAA Industries flanked by Abdul Rahman Noohu – Director AAA Industries (extreme left ) and Azad Zaheed – Head of Orphan Care (extreme right )

The OrphanCare Trust has entered into a partnership with AAA Industries (Pvt) Limited, a footwear manufacturer, through which the company will make a financial contribution to OrphanCare on the basis of each shoe sold on selected footwear brands.

This collaboration marks yet another step in expanding the Trust’s efforts to uplift the lives of orphaned children across the country in line with UNSDG No. 10 Reduced Inequalities, thereby preventing a “second abandonment” of orphans, a term used to describe the loss of care and support children often experience once they leave institutional homes. Through periodic deposits made directly into individual orphan accounts, OrphanCare brings a unique and compassionate approach to help these young adults transition toward independence.

Guided by Article 2 of the UN Convention on the Rights of the Child, OrphanCare ensures that all orphaned children have access to the programme without any form of discrimination, irrespective of their race, colour, religion, region or ethnicity.

Apart from the financial contribution to orphan accounts, Orphan Care Trust has been dedicated to supporting orphan welfare through a range of initiatives including education, vocational training, youth and women empowerment, medical and healthcare assistance, and the creation of job pathways for youth leaving care homes upon turning 18.

Airing his views on this partnership, C.M.Noohu , Director of AAA Industries, emphasized the company’s commitment to value-driven philanthropy. He stated, “Our pledge of support to the OrphanCare project reflects the values that guide our business. We believe in contributing meaningfully to Sri Lanka’s orphan community, and this partnership is one we intend to continue.”

Welcoming AAA Industries as a valued Merchant Partner, Marshad Barry, Deputy Head of Orphan Care said “This generous gesture will help us expand the benefits we offer to all orphans registered under our programme. We are pleased to have AAA Industries on-board as we continue our mission to improve the lives and futures of these vulnerable children.”

Azad Zaheed, Head of Orphan Care, and Abdul Rahman Noohu, Director of AAA Industries, were also present at the formalisation of the partnership, further underscoring the commitment of both organizations to this long-term collaboration.

Established with Amana Bank as the founding sponsor, OrphanCare aims to create a nurturing and enabling environment for the orphaned children to thrive and avoid a second abandonment. A notable feature of this initiative is that Amana Bank ensures that every donated rupee directly reaches the intended beneficiaries since all administrative and operational costs are fully borne by the Bank.

To date OrphanCare has enrolled over 3,200 orphans from 90+ child care homes across the country. OrphanCare recently unveiled its inaugural Impact Report, highlighting the transformative difference it has made in the lives of orphaned children across Sri Lanka.