David Pieris Automobiles partners with renowned automotive giant BAIC

David Pieris Automobiles (Private) Limited (DPA) has announced its partnership in Sri Lanka with Beijing Automotive Industry Holding Co., Ltd. (BAIC).

This strategic partnership brings together two pillars of automotive excellence, promising a new era of innovative, quality products and unparalleled customer service for Sri Lankan motorists.

BAIC is the 6th largest automobile company in China. Founded in 1958 as the Beijing Automotive Manufacturing Factory (BAMF), it has emerged as one of China’s leading and globally recognised automotive conglomerates with a rich history marked by milestones such as the development of iconic vehicles like the Jinggangshan sedan, BJ212, and BJ130. As a key player in the Fortune 500, its parent company, Beijing Automotive Group Co., Ltd., holds the 162nd position, underlining its financial strength and market presence.

With cumulative sales exceeding 31 million units, BAIC’s products are available in over 110 countries and regions through 360 sales and service outlets underscoring the brand’s global reach and market acceptance. These include Southeast Asia, Central and West Asia, the Middle East, Africa, Central and South America, and Europe.

BAIC has been a pioneering force in China’s automotive industry, establishing joint ventures with major international players such as American Motors Corporation, Hyundai Korea, and Mercedes-Benz. BAIC’s close affiliation with Mercedes-Benz is highlighted by its 9.98% stake in the Mercedes-Benz Group, making it the largest individual shareholder.

The product portfolio of the BAIC Group includes a diverse range of private cars (ARCFOX, BEIJING, and BAIC ORV), independent commercial vehicles (BAIC Foton, BAIC Changhe), and joint venture brands (Beijing Benz, Fujian Benz, Beijing Hyundai Motor, and Foton Daimler).

Rohana Dissanayake, Chairman and Managing Director of the David Pieris Group said, “The collaboration between David Pieris Automobiles and BAIC represents a union of two industry leaders, each with a commitment to innovation, quality, and customer satisfaction. Together, we aim to redefine the automotive landscape in Sri Lanka, offering high-quality, best in class vehicles and unparalleled after-sales support”.

Related Topics:Beijing Automotive Industry Holding Co.David Pieris Automobiles (Private) LimitedLtd. (BAIC)

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.