Kingslake elevated to Infor’s Gold Partnership status

Kingslake, a leading provider of enterprise software solutions, has achieved Gold Partnership status with Infor, a global leader in business cloud software products for industry-specific markets. Achieving this milestone reflects a proven track record of successful implementations and satisfied clients, demonstrating Kingslake’s commitment to maintaining high standards of service delivery. This accomplishment significantly enhances Kingslake’s capacity to implement and service cutting-edge Infor solutions, including Infor WMS and Infor SyteLine ERP, to its customers.

As a Gold Partner, Kingslake now offers a wider range of comprehensive solutions with advanced AI-driven insights and superior support. Infor WMS provides scalable, Tier-1 inventory and labour management with 3PL invoicing, featuring 3D visualizations for real-time warehouse monitoring and optimized workflows. Infor SyteLine, a comprehensive ERP solution for various manufacturing needs, enhances operational efficiency with advanced analytics, enabling businesses to visualize production processes, streamline resources, and drive growth.

“We are thrilled to be elevated to Gold Partner status with Infor. This partnership underscores our commitment to providing our clients with the best in digital transformation, tailored to their specific needs in the manufacturing and logistics industry,” said Duleep Fernando, CEO of Kingslake.

“With Infor’s innovative software suite and Kingslake’s comprehensive support, we are geared to help businesses streamline their operations, enhance productivity, and achieve their strategic goals,” added Shalika Pituwala, VP- Business Consulting at Kingslake.

“We appreciate our customers’ continued trust and for utilizing our solutions to enhance their competitiveness and profitability. Achieving Gold Partnership status with Infor is a testament to our team’s dedication and expertise in implementing Infor’s solutions further added Dilshan Perera, VP- Sales at Kingslake.

Investors’ presidential or parliamentary poll first quandary checks share trading momentum

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.