The Unit Trust industry closes 2025 with Rs. 587 Bn assets under management

The Unit Trust industry of Sri Lanka reported a 7.8% year-over-year growth of its assets under management (AUM) to Rs. 587 Bn by the end of 2025. During the year, the AUM reached a high of Rs. 613 Bn, indicating continued interest in the asset category. These assets are currently managed across 86 funds by 16 management companies.

While fixed-income funds accounted for the largest share of AUM, equity-related funds saw strong inflows, increasing by Rs. 30 Bn in 2025 compared to just Rs. 2 Bn for fixed-income funds. This reflects improved investor sentiment, with a clear shift from a capital preservation mindset toward long-term capital growth.

The year also saw a move from ultra-safe short-term instruments to medium-term growth, with strong inflows into open-ended income funds, open-ended equity index/sector funds, and balanced funds, accompanied by a decline in inflows to money-market funds. Additionally, open-ended growth funds (equity) recorded a 79% year-over-year increase, signalling a rising risk appetite among investors.

Commenting on the full-year industry performance, Secretary of the Unit Trust Association of Sri Lanka (UTASL) and Director/CEO of Senfin Asset Management Jeevan Sukumaran noted: “Post-economic crisis, the unit trust industry has been on a strong upward trend with the AUM surpassing Rs. 600 Bn last year.

‘’The steady growth of the unit trust industry in 2025 is a strong indication of increasing investor confidence in professionally managed and well-regulated investment products. Beyond the growth in fund flows, we have also seen encouraging progress in expanding the investor base — not only in terms of unit holder numbers, but also in the broadening of investor demographics — reflecting a gradual shift towards long-term, market-linked investing.”

A Record Year for Marketing That Works: SLIM Effie Awards Sri Lanka 2025 crosses 300+ entries

Swisstek Aluminium opens design studio focused on modern architectural aluminium

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.