NelFarms wins two prestigious awards at Sri Lanka Clean Energy Week 2025

From left: Sri Lanka Sustainable Energy Authority Chairman Prof. Wijendra J. Bandara, Noorani Estates Chief Financial Officer Asitha Jayamaha, and Public Utilities Commission of Sri Lanka Deputy Chairman/Commissioner Eng. Piyal Hennayake

NelFarms, a pioneer in integrating renewable energy into Sri Lanka’s poultry sector, has won two top awards at the recently concluded third edition of Sri Lanka Clean Energy Week 2025.

The company was honoured with: Best Solar Project Deal of the Year in the Project Showcase category and Company of the Year: Excellence in Corporate Adaptation in the Sustainability Leadership category.

The event, organised by firstVIEW and powered by SolarQuarter South Asia, brought together industry leaders, innovators, and policymakers to recognise outstanding contributions to the clean energy transition.

NelFarms added 6.9 megawatts of solar power to its already existing 1.5 megawatts recently taking its connected solar power load to over 8 megawatts. NelFarms, one of the largest integrated poultry producers in Sri Lanka, now operates one of the largest privately held solar projects in Sri Lanka. By embedding solar power into its poultry operations, the company has significantly reduced its carbon footprint while setting a benchmark for sustainable practices in the agribusiness sector.

“These awards are a testament to our unwavering commitment to sustainability and our vision to lead by example,” said NelFarms Managing Director Noordeen Sethwala. “As a responsible corporate organisation, Noorani Estates Ltd. is proud to contribute to Sri Lanka’s national clean energy targets while ensuring the long-term resilience of our poultry and agribusiness operations.”

NelFarms Chief Financial Officer Asitha Jayamaha said, “As the market leader in clean energy adoption within the poultry sector, Noorani Estates Ltd. continues to champion renewable energy as a pathway towards a greener, more sustainable future for Sri Lanka.”