Soul Energise signs national distribution agreement

Soul Coffee Group and Grape Expectations announced the signing of a national distribution agreement for the newly launched Soul Energise Drinks. The agreement will enable Soul Energise to be available across all major sales channels, including supermarkets,  hotels, bars, and restaurants across Sri Lanka.

Soul Energise, a recently launched innovative beverage, is a tropical adventure drink crafted with natural caffeine from raw coffee beans and infused with tropical fruit flavours of Sri Lanka.  Soul Energise is a refreshing drink enriched with antioxidants, providing a natural caffeine boost and hydration. It is available in three tropical flavours: Original, Lemon Lime and Wild Orange. The beverage is packed with 15 essential vitamins, minerals and electrolytes, with reduced sugar and lower calories, creating a refreshing drink that energises before or after physical activity.

“Grape Expectations is a trusted and experienced distributor in the beverage industry. With their extensive network and expertise, we are confident that we will reach our target audience and grow our brand presence in Sri Lanka,” said Rinosh  Nasar, Founder & CEO of Soul Coffee Group.

In 2014, Soul Coffee Group began its journey to be an ethical coffee brand with a simple goal: to provide everyone with access to great-tasting coffee, sustainably grown by smallholder farmers in Sri Lanka. The Group has now diversified into the ready-to-drink (RTD) beverages segment with cold brews and caffeinated drinks and into value-added coffees with instant coffees and premixes. Soul Coffee Group has a significant presence in private label manufacturing and is now one of the leading premium coffee brands in the country. Its coffee is sourced from over 1,000 farming families, and its products are available in over 500 locations island-wide and three countries internationally.

“Grape Expectations is always looking for innovative and quality products for our customers. We are excited to introduce Soul Energise drinks to the Sri Lankan market, as we believe it will appeal to the health-conscious and adventurous consumers who are looking for something new and different in the caffeinated drinks segment,” said Johanne De Zilwa,  Director & Head of Retail at Grape Expectations.

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.