People’s Leasing’s Rs.10bn debenture gets ‘BBB+(lka)’ Fitch rating

Fitch Ratings has assigned a final ‘BBB+(lka)’ National Long-Term Rating to People’s Leasing & Finance PLC’s (PLC) proposed subordinated debenture issue of up to Rs.10 billion, with the funds earmarked to strengthen the finance company’s Tier 2 capital base.

The Sri Lankan rupee-denominated debentures will have a five-year maturity and are to be listed on the Colombo Stock Exchange. PLC plans to use the proceeds to bolster its Tier 2 capital and maintain compliance with the regulatory capital adequacy requirements.

The final rating is unchanged from the expected rating Fitch assigned to the proposed issue on May 8, 2026, following the receipt of documentation conforming to information previously provided to the rating agency. The ‘BBB+(lka)’ rating on the debentures is two notches below PLC’s ‘A(lka)’ National Long-Term Rating, reflecting the subordinated nature of the debt and Fitch’s expectation of poor recoveries for the investors in the event of a default.

Fitch said it applied its Bank Rating Criteria in assessing the debentures, as Sri Lanka’s prudential capital framework for the finance companies is considered broadly comparable to that is applicable to the banks. However, the agency did not apply additional notching for the non-performance risk as the proposed securities do not contain going-concern loss-absorption features. PLC’s National Long-Term Rating was upgraded to ‘A(lka)’, from ‘A-(lka)’ in January 2025, following an upgrade of parent People’s Bank to ‘AA-(lka)’, from ‘A(lka)’.

Fitch said PLC’s rating reflects its expectation that the company would receive extraordinary support from People’s Bank if required. This assessment is underpinned by the bank’s majority ownership of PLC, the subsidiary’s strategic and synergistic role within the group and their shared branding.

However, Fitch noted that PLC’s significant size relative to its parent acts as an offsetting factor in assessing the likelihood of support.