China reveals plans to resume maritime research after Sri Lanka’s one-year ban

ECONOMYNEXT – China is planning to start its maritime research in the Indian Ocean, a top Beijing government official said, as a temporary one-year ban imposed due to strong Indian protests comes to an end in January 2025.

Sri Lanka’s previous government has imposed a temporary one-year ban on all foreign research vessels visiting Sri Lanka for research purposes. The move came in December last year after strong security concerns raised by India on Chinese research vessels.

Qin Boyong, Vice Chairperson of the National Committee of the Chinese People’s Political Consultative Conference (CPPCC) discussed the plans to resume maritime research when she met President Anura Kumara Dissanayake on Wednesday (18).

During the meeting, President Dissanayake highlighted the importance of completing the unfinished sections of the

Central Expressway under Chinese management and expressed hopes to expedite the commencement of supply hubs and institutional projects centered around the Colombo Port City and Hambantota District, the President’s Media Division (PMD) said in a statement.

“Ms. Qin Boyong stated that there are plans to restart maritime research activities, which were temporarily halted for various reasons, along with initiating relevant projects,” the PMD said.

“Furthermore, she mentioned that Chinese companies intend to establish themselves in the Hambantota investment zone, aiming to provide Sri Lanka with better global access.”

“She also revealed that preparations are underway to warmly welcome President Anura Kumara Dissanayake during his future visit to China.”

China’s comments on resuming maritime research activities in the Indian Ocean comes two days after the Indian government expressed confidence in Sri Lanka of giving due care for the security concerns over the visits of Chinese research vessels.

Indian Foreign Secretary Shri Vikram Misri on Monday (16) said India’s understanding was that the Sri Lanka government is looking at the issue and there are a number of considerations Sri Lanka needs to take into account while India has highlighted their perspectives including the role that India plays in maritime security, maritime research.

The Foreign Secretary’s comments came during a media briefing after Sri Lanka President Anura Kumara Dissanayake met India’s Prime Minister Narendra Modi on a three-day official visit.

President Dissanayake has ensured that Sri Lanka’s territory will not be used in a way that might impact India’s security.

Sri Lanka temporarily banned foreign research ships citing it wants to establish a SOP (Standard Operation Procedure) for such vessels and all other vessels before removing the ban. However, Sri Lanka’s Foreign Ministry officials say there was no such SOP established.

Two Chinese research ships were allowed to dock in Sri Lanka ports within 14 months through October 2023 with one called for replenishment and the other for research purposes.

In August 2022, Chinese navy vessel Yuan Wang 5 docked at Hambantota in southern Sri Lanka for replenishment.

Chinese research ship Shi Yan 6 arrived in Sri Lanka in October 2023 and docked in Colombo port, for what Beijing citing was for “geophysical scientific research” in collaboration with the island nation’s National Aquatic Resources Research and Development Agency (NARA).

Both drew strong Indian protests citing security concerns in the Indian Ocean.

India uses the Colombo port as its main transshipment hub and accounts for around 70 percent of the total transshipment volume of the port. (Colombo/December 16/2024)