Sri Lanka’s newest airline Air Ceilao promises to revolutionise air travel

To fly to Middle East and Asia Pacific initially and expand to long-haul destinations across Europe and Australia in second phase

A thrilling new chapter in Sri Lanka’s aviation story will unfold with the imminent launch of Air Ceilao, the nation’s newest international airline.

With an ambition to revolutionise the local industry, Air Ceilao said yesterday it is ready to take off harnessing Sri Lanka’s strategic position as a regional aviation hub and reshape how the world views air travel.

This bold newcomer will not be just another airline; and aims to become a pioneering force that blends the elegance of full-service airlines with the affordability of low-cost carriers that caters to both the discerning traveller and the budget-conscious flyer. With Air Ceilao, air travel will no longer be a choice between luxury and value — it will be an experience that offers both that truly understands and caters to customers’ every need.

With plans already in motion and ongoing engagement with the Civil Aviation Authority of Sri Lanka, the countdown to Air Ceilao’s debut has begun. Starting with a fleet of narrow- and wide-bodied aircraft, the airline will initially connect passengers to key destinations in the Middle East and Asia Pacific. Phase two of the expansion will see Air Ceilao stretching its wings even further reaching long-haul destinations across Europe and Australia.

Air Ceilao is founded on the pillars of innovation, inclusivity, sustainability and an unwavering commitment to unmatched customer experience. “We’re here to redefine air travel,” says Chairman Janith Kashan. “Our digital-first approach ensures seamless journeys, making air travel not just accessible but extraordinary for everyone.”

The launch comes at a time of exciting growth for Sri Lanka, as the country’s tourism industry booms and infrastructure expands. Air Ceilao is set to be a major driver of this growth, opening up new opportunities and creating jobs that will empower local talent and boost the economy. “We’ve assembled an elite team with extensive experience in the aviation industry,” Kashan reveals. “This, combined with our nationwide recruitment campaign, will ensure that Air Ceilao is staffed by the best and brightest — especially local talent, who are at the heart of our mission.”