Fems elevates feminine hygiene with 3X Protection

Fems, the trusted name in feminine hygiene, has relaunched its sanitary napkin line, with an all-new 3X Protection technology designed to offer unparalleled comfort & safety, and featuring enhanced packaging designed to better inform and empower consumers.

The relaunch highlights the brand’s commitment to providing superior protection and comfort inspiring Sri Lankan women to live lives confidently, free from worries about leaks and discomfort.

The Fems range showcases a fresh packaging design that reflects innovation and care that goes into each product. The range includes Fems Cotton Feel (Pink Pack), Fems Drytex (Purple Pack), and Fems Heavy Flow (Turquoise Blue Pack).

Fems understand the diverse needs of women and the relaunch is focused on enhancing the customer experience by clearly communicating the unique benefits and features of the products ensuring every woman feels confident, comfortable, and protected throughout her day.

The educational and informative packaging explains the advantages of Fems 3X Protection such as the sanitary napkins being ‘Skin Safe’ or dermatologically tested ensuring skin safety and comfort for all users, ‘Body Fit’ offering a perfect fit for all body types, with embossed top features for better absorption and adaptability enhancing comfort and security, and ‘Leak Proof’ with leak control lines providing peace of mind with superior leak prevention.

Information on the pack also includes information to access the Fio App, a resourceful platform offering valuable insights on period health. A QR code on the packaging enables users to easily scan and download the app, building more informed conversations around feminine hygiene further demonstrating Fems’ commitment to women’s overall well-being.

Fems continues to lead with innovation, upholding the brand vision of enabling women to be independent and rise above by understanding and empathizing with their current and future feminine hygiene needs.

Invest in education plans: Securing the future of the nation’s children

Prime Lands recognised for excellence on global stage with double wins at World Business Outlook Awards 2024

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.