ComBank tops banking sector in LMD’s first Corporate Happiness Index

The Commercial Bank of Ceylon has been ranked No 1 among Sri Lankan banks in the inaugural Corporate Happiness Index (CHI) just released by LMD magazine.

The Bank has also been ranked one of Sri Lanka’s “happiest second homes” taking fifth place overall in the ranking, following the high positions it achieved in the 16 attributes that made up the survey conducted by PepperCube Consultants for this pioneering initiative.

Remarkably, Commercial Bank was the highest-ranked bank in 14 of the 16 attributes, leading the banking sector in several fundamentally-important aspects related to employees, such as ‘Remuneration scales,’ ‘Rewards & Perks,’ ‘Career progression,’ ‘Work environment,’ ‘Gender balance,’ ‘Health & wellbeing,’ ‘Work-life balance,’ ‘Workplace diversity,’ and ‘Workplace flexibility.’

Commercial Bank was also ranked No 1 in the banking sector for ‘Financial stability,’ ‘Corporate leadership,’ ‘Workplace camaraderie,’ ‘Open culture’ and ‘Recreational facilities.’

Besides its emphatic leadership in the banking sector, the LMD Corporate Happiness Index ranked Commercial Bank among the top five corporate entities in Sri Lanka across all sectors, in 10 of the 16 attribute rankings, and among the top ten overall, in 15 of the attribute rankings.

The Bank was ranked second overall for the attributes of ‘Financial stability’ and ‘Workplace camaraderie,’ third for ‘Career progression’ and fourth in Sri Lanka for ‘Workplace diversity’as well as ‘Workplace flexibility.’

“The importance of workplace happiness cannot be over-emphasised in today’s fast-paced corporate environments, and we welcome this groundbreaking effort by LMD magazine to redefine understanding of workplace wellbeing and to rank companies on their progress in this sphere,” Commercial Bank Managing Director/CEO Sanath Manatunge said. “At Commercial Bank, a lot of attention is devoted to creating a workplace culture that ensures that employees can achieve their full potential as they build their careers. Our biggest strength is our people, and there is intense focus on their wellbeing, including minimising work-related stress which can negatively affect the health of employees as well as the productivity of the organisation.”

Commercial Bank also has the distinction of being in the Top 10 of the LMD 100 ranking of Sri Lanka’s leading listed companies, which is primarily based on turnover, every year since the ranking was first published 31 years ago.

Pan Asia Bank partners with the National Chamber of Commerce and NEDA

Aitken Spence companies recognised at the TAGS awards by CA Sri Lanka

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.