Negombo: anatomy of a system unchanged

“”Where are the people of character, courage, conviction, competence and common sense?”Lee Iacocca (Where Have All the Leaders Gone?)

Overcrowding has been a fact of Lankan prison life at least since the dawn of the new millennium. A system built to accommodate around 11,000 inmates held 16,412 in 2000. By 2021, Lankan prisons had around 22,000 inmates.

Between 2021 and 2023, Lankan prison population experienced a quantum leap. By 2023, the country had 30,883 prisoners. In 2021, the overcrowding rate was 162.4%. By 2023, it had reached an all-time high of 265%.

This sudden jump was due not to an increase in convictions but to an increase in pre-trial detention. The number of detainees went up from around 13,000 in 2021 to 21,243 in 2023. In 2021, the rate of remand prisoners (as a percentage of total prisoners) was 59.96%; it jumped to 68.78% in 2023.

This unprecedented hike in detainees was caused not by an increase in crime rate but by a new piece of legislation. In September 2022, Minister of Justice, Prison Affairs, and Constitutional Reform Wijeyadasa Rajapakshe introduced the Poisons, Opium, and Dangerous Drugs (Amendment) Bill. Prior to this, the high court had the power to grant bail to suspects allegedly possessing narcotics of 2g or more of pure quantity, with lower courts having the power to grant bail to anything below that level. With the 2022 amendment, anyone suspected of possessing narcotics of 10g or more of pure quantity had to get bail from the appeal court. Even then, bail could be granted only under exceptional circumstances.

To determine whether the seized substance was narcotics or not and what its pure quantity was required a report by the Government Analysts Department. Since the Department was chronically under-staffed, reports would take an average of six months or more. During this time, the suspect would be in detention, leading to that sudden explosion of prison overpopulation of 2023.

While prison population experienced a quantum leap, the number of prison staff and the extent of prison facilities remained more or less unchanged. This created a harrowing and dangerous imbalance within the prison system: too many inmates and too few of everything else – from prison officials to sanitary facilities and sleeping space.

The 2023 Auditor General Report on Prisons highlighted the unsustainability of the situation. Its recommended solutions included charging suspected addicts not under Section 54 but under Section 78 enabling their redirection from remand to rehabilitation and treatment ((http://prisons.gov.lk/web/wp-content/uploads/2024/07/performance-report-2024_EN.pdf).

A similar proposal, based on regarding addiction not as a crime but as a sickness, had been under consideration in 2020. According to the 2020 Progress Report of the State Ministry of Prison Reforms, “Discussions are in progress with the Department of Police on exploring the possibility of constituting legal action under Section 78 instead of Section 54 of the Poisons, Opium and Dangerous Drugs (Amendment) Act… (to) direct most of the drug addicts for rehabilitation and treatment. This will also offer a solution to the overcrowding of prisons…” (https://www.prisonmin.gov.lk/web/images/pdf/progress-report-2020.pdf). The draconian amendment of 2022 put an end to this rational proposal aimed at treating addiction and controlling prison population. Almost two years into NPP/JVP rule, that proposal remains dead.

In a 2025 interview, Government Analyst Sandhya Kumudini Rajapakse emphasised the need to decentralise the Department “because we receive data from across the country, not just from the Narcotics or the Drugs Divisions… There (also) needs to be a continuous process for recruitment…” (The Morning – 22.8.2025).

It is important to bear in mind that these proposals to deal with prison overcrowding came not from local or international human rights organisation (those NGOs and INGOs hated by every government) but from within the state itself. They were based on experience and hard-nosed realism – system change at its most practical.

The current administration had time enough and numbers enough to implement these measures and chose not to. That inaction helped birth the bloody action in Negombo, a prison built to hold only about 600 prisoners and yet keeping within its walls over 2,500. A place where food is abysmal, sanitation facilities a hell within a hell, and prisoners compelled to sleep on a shift basis. A place where hard-core drug traffickers and non-violent drug addicts, major criminals and minor offenders all live cheek by jowl. A place where power is currency and violence quotidian.

In October 2025, the NPP/JVP government initiated a programme to eradicate drugs and drug trafficking. Unlike programmes by previous governments, Ratama Ekata seems to be targeting large scale drug traffickers and not just addicts and small time sellers. Unfortunately, the programme was implemented while keeping the ill-advised 2022 Amendment in place. This has caused another quantum leap in the number of detainees. Consequently, by mid-2026, prison population reached a new high, 42,034. Of this, 73.8% are detainees, another record.

If Minister of Justice Harshana Nanayakkara is to be believed, the government was aware of the counterproductive nature of the 2022 Amendment. Addressing the parliament, post-Negombo, he said that cabinet approval has been obtained to amend the regulation. Minister Nalinda Jayatissa confirmed that the law will be amended so that “cases involving drugs generally exceeding 10g are referred to the High Court and if the amount is below that, they are referred to other lower courts” (Economy Next – 8.7.2026).

The obvious question is why didn’t the government bring in that amendment before the launch of its anti-drug campaign? Had it done so, the overcrowding explosion would not have happened and Negombo might have been avoided – at least its scale and intensity reduced.

In his post-Negombo special statement, Minister Nanayakkara admitted that “before even knowing what was seized was heroin or crushed Panadol, a person has to be in remand for about year and a half.” In August 2023, the Appeal Court granted bail to a suspect who was arrested with 9.4g of heroin in October 2019 and had been in detention since then sans trial. Would nearly four years of arbitrary detention generate introspection and repentance or hatred towards the system which can burst into gruesome violence when conditions permit?

In its 2017 report on Lankan Prisons, the Office of the High Commissioner of Human Rights stated that, “It is common for a pre-trial detention to continue for three to four years and in some instances longer, even up to 10 years… People on remand are held in dire conditions and often choose to plead guilty to expedite the proceedings. In a number of cases, accused persons have spent numerous years in pre-trial detention but were subsequently acquitted and released from prison without any acknowledgement of the wrongful imprisonment or compensation for the years in custody… (There were) numerous cases in which accused persons were granted bail, but remained in custody because they were unable to afford the bail or provide the required sureties… (https://www.ohchr.org/en/statements-and-speeches/2017/12/working-group-arbitrary-detention-preliminary-findings-its-visit?LangID=E&NewsID=22541).

A 2020 Report by the Human Rights Commission of Sri Lanka highlights the urgent need to amend national prison regulations. According to existing regulations, “prisoners under 18 years of age are held with prisoners up to the age of twenty-two…” This is a recipe to turn first time offenders of today into hardened criminals of tomorrow. National regulations also “recommend the segregation of persons from a socially influential background from other prisoners…” In other words, prison system is structured to discriminate between have and have-not prisoners. Obviously, inmates from the ‘wrong side’ of the socio-economic tracks are the prime victims of the horrors for which Lankan prison system has become a byword. For example, “The overcrowding of wards results in many new remandees standing all night-long as they do not have the space to sleep… The Commission observed that an officer’s treatment of an inmate is often determined by a prisoner’s social standing, race, religion… Violence is seen as the primary means of maintaining order inside the prison, which may be why prisoners reported being beaten for even inconsequential reasons… Prisoners often accused police of planting drugs to frame them.”

Suspects remaining in pre-trial detention for long periods is the norm, the Report points out. “The Government Analyst Department is underfunded, under-resourced, and does not have an adequate number of officers to tackle the large volume of cases it receives daily… Therefore, it can take up to one year for the Government Analyst to issue a report… Delays can also occur because the police do not send the sample for analysis in a timely manner.”

The report pointed out the far from ideal conditions under which prison officials are compelled to perform their duties. They suffer from stressful working conditions, long shifts and insufficient pay. They are also not trained in non-violent ways of maintaining order, leaving them with little choice but to become cogs in the violence-counter-violence wheel (https://www.hrcsl.lk/wp-content/uploads/2020/01/Prison-Report-Final-2.pdf).

Prisons which are like hells on earth, prisoners who are often regarded as less-than-human, prison official who do a dangerous job for inadequate pay – it is a combustible combination. So long as these root causes remain unaddressed, prison riots would remain disasters waiting to happen.

The Welikada prison riot of 2012 left 27 dead. Eye witnesses and the opposition alleged that some prisoners were killed execution-style, based on a list. Mahara prison riot of 2020 left 11 dead.

In both riots, the dead were all prisoners. In the Negombo riot, the dead included prison officials. Many were murdered in cold blood in the most barbaric way imaginable.

The cycle of violence seems to continue. According to media reports, three of the Negombo detainees transferred to Welikada, Boossa and Angunakolapalassa prisons have died. Allegations are being made that they were murdered by prison officials, in revenge.

The violence of the Negombo riot was horrifying, but far from abnormal, given Lankan society marked propensity towards bloodshed and brutality.

Some of the prison officials were supposed to have been beaten to death. So were parliamentarian Amarakeerthi Atukorala and his police bodyguard in 2022. So was British Muslim Khuram Shaik in 2011, murdered by a Rajapaksa henchman and his gang in a hotel in Tangalle. According to eyewitness Orion Foster, a Canadian tourist, Mr Shaikh “was walking and hunched over hugging himself. Things were being thrown at him and he was being beaten while he was walking. He made it to end of the pool area where they caught up to him. Three guys were bearing down on him and then attacked him. This is where I believe he was again wounded severely by the broken bottle and they slashed his throat. He only made it another 15 feet where he collapsed and did not get back up’” (Rochdale Observer – 30.12.2011).

Two years previously, in October 2009, a man started throwing stones at passing vehicles in Bambalapitiya. A mob consisting of policemen and civilians chased him. When he waded into the sea to escape, two policemen waded in after him and hammered him with wooden poles. Footage showed the victim begging for mercy. Finally, he waded deeper into the sea to escape, and drowned. Initially the police claimed that the victim died of drowning. But a cameraman from a private TV station had videoed the tableau of violence. Eventually it was discovered that the victim was indeed a mental patient. The civilians and the policemen who attacked him, though not formally diagnosed, were far more diseased in the mind.

As Dr Jayan Mendis, a psychiatric specialist, pointed out in 2012, “We lived with a war for thirty years. All those who are 30 years or so were born, bred and schooled within a war situation… They knew of war and war alone…. Now it is over. However, what one grows up with is not easily forgotten. Some would want to kill any person who troubles him on even a small issue, just to get even. They know of killings and murder quite well. That is their experience… These murders show that Sri Lankan society is sick” (The Sunday Leader – 1.12.2012).

Lankan society as a collective, and many Lankans as individuals are addicted to ‘violent solutions’. We have a tendency to lapse into violence and glorify violence so long as it is directed against a person/persons seen as the ‘Other’. What was done in Negombo was barbaric and horrendous, but it was also very much a part of this Lankan normal. And so long as Lankans prisons remain overcrowded hells, they will act as ideal breeding grounds for worse outbursts of brutality and hate.

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.