President’s Fund recognises A-Level high-flyers in North Central Province

A ceremony to honour the top performers in the 2023/2024 G.C.E. Advanced Level (A-Level) examinations at the district level, sponsored by the President’s Fund, was held yesterday at the Anuradhapura Central College auditorium. The event was chaired by Speaker of Parliament Dr. Jagath Wickramaratne.

During the ceremony, 241 students from the Anuradhapura and Polonnaruwa districts who secured positions 1 to 10 across all six subject streams in the 2023 and 2024 A-Level examinations were awarded certificates and an incentive payment of Rs. 100,000 each. The total expenditure for this initiative by the President’s Fund was Rs. 24.1 million, the President’s Media Division said.

Senior Additional Secretary to the President and President’s Fund Secretary Roshan Gamage delivered the welcome address and outlined the objectives of the program.

The keynote address was delivered by Speaker Dr. Wickramaratne. He stated that the President’s Fund is now fulfilling its true role by providing highly efficient and effective services for the people and expressed his great satisfaction regarding this initiative.

The event was also addressed by Land and Irrigation Deputy Minister Susil Ranasinghe and North Central Province Governor Wasantha Jinadasa. Parliamentarians Sena Nanayakkara, Bhagya Sri Herath, and Thilina Samarakoon were among the distinguished guests in attendance.

Meanwhile, a special one-day training workshop was held on Saturday at the Anuradhapura District Secretariat for officers in charge of the subject from all Divisional Secretariat offices in the North Central Province. This is part of the initiative to decentralise the operations of the President’s Fund to the regional level.

The workshop aimed to educate the officers working on the President’s Fund’s programs in the Anuradhapura and Polonnaruwa districts, where it hoped to increase the number of beneficiaries from the North Central Province.