Loops Integrated ends The Four A’s Advertising Awards 2024 on a high

Loops Integrated, Sri Lanka’s premier integrated advertising agency in Sri Lanka, achieved remarkable success at the prestigious Four A’s Advertising Awards 2024. The agency proudly collected 3 gold and 3 bronze awards, marking a significant milestone in Sri Lankan commercial creativity.

Anoj Wijayaratne, General Manager, said: “Six awards for creative excellence in such a brief period since our agency’s transition to Integrated is an exhilarating triumph. We’ve built a remarkable team of talented individuals both young and old who bring freshness and seasoned experience to the campaigns we do. We are excited and motivated to continue pushing the boundaries of innovation in the industry.”

The winning campaigns that highlighted the agency’s innovative prowess in creativity are: ‘Suwa Walan’ Campaign for AIA – 2 Gold Awards & 1 Bronze Award [Category: Static Special, Best Use of Ambient Media & Environment and Experience Design], ‘Oluwa Wanang’ Campaign for Central Bank of Sri Lanka – 1 Gold Award & 1 Bronze Award [Category: Film & TV- Film & TV Up to 180 Seconds]’ and Seylan Signfluencer’ Campaign – 1 Bronze Award [Category: Original Content – Influencer]

Perez Daniel, Executive Creative Director, added: “We pursued international recognition earlier this year with the aim of elevating the calibre of creativity as an Integrated Agency. Loops became the first Digital Agency in Sri Lanka’s creative industry to be awarded this distinction when it received the coveted Young Spikes. The wins at 4As Creative Awards are evidence of this never-ending quest for greatness. This acknowledgement presents another opportunity to demonstrate the Agency’s creativity and strategic effectiveness in building strong brands over all mediums. “

The agency’s success underscores its role as a trailblazer in the Sri Lankan advertising landscape, consistently delivering high-impact campaigns that resonate with audiences.

Cuisines of the World with Nations Trust Bank American Express

Share market forges ahead in an optimistic spirit; turnover exceeds Rs. 3 billion

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.