NDB NEOS Corporate drives NDB’s victory as Sri Lanka’s Best Bank for Corporates at Euromoney Awards 2024

National Development Bank PLC (NDB) has been named Sri Lanka’s Best Bank for Corporates at the Euromoney Awards 2024, highlighting the bank’s unparalleled commitment to supporting businesses across various sectors.

The Euromoney Awards are known for their rigorous assessment process, and NDB’s victory in the Best Bank for Corporates category is a reflection of the bank’s continuous efforts to provide value-added services for corporate clients, including large enterprises, small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs), and emerging businesses.

NDB’s Corporate Banking capabilities are rooted in understanding the specific needs of businesses. NDB’s NEOS Corporate, a cutting-edge platform that is redefining corporate banking in Sri Lanka, offers an advanced suite of online payment solutions and cash management tools and also provides seamless control over domestic and international transactions, bulk payments, and salary disbursements.

This sophisticated platform also introduces features such as electronic cheque printing, real-time tracking, and chequebook request modules—offering unprecedented control and transparency to corporate clients. NDB’s focus on security is evident with the inclusion of two-factor authentication (hard and soft tokens), ensuring the highest standards of digital protection for its users. Further, NEOS Corporate enables multiple company linkages under the same user ID, streamlining operations for group entities and providing solutions that drive operational efficiency, growth, and innovation.

Moreover, NEOSBIZ, a digital banking solution tailored for SMEs, enables users to manage financial operations with ease, offering features like bulk fund transfers, employee salary payments, and secure multi-user access.

Smartest and most customisable Life Insurance solution for every lifestyle

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.