American Premium Water strikes Gold at Dragons of Sri Lanka 2026

American Premium Water has secured four wins at Dragons of Sri Lanka Awards 2026, including three Gold Dragons and one Black Dragon, marking a significant milestone for the brand following its relaunch last year.

Part of the Dragons of Asia awards, Dragons of Sri Lanka brings the program’s regional platform to the local market, celebrating creative and effective marketing communications, with entries evaluated on strategic thinking, creativity, execution and impact. Established in 2000, Dragons of Asia is one of Asia’s premier results-driven marketing awards programs.

For American Premium Water, the achievements are particularly significant given that the company’s debut at the Dragons awards has resulted in four Dragons across four categories. In the distinction of Gold Dragons, American Premium Water was recognized across three categories including Product Launch or Re Launch, Cause, Environment or Sustainability and Creative Excellence while the Black Dragon was awarded in recognition of Small Budget.

The achievements come a little over a year after American Premium Water’s brand relaunch in 2025, marking a  new chapter for the company as it strengthens its positioning, builds greater relevance and creates meaningful connections with customers.

“We are incredibly proud of these achievements. Winning four Dragons, including three Golds and a Black, is a wonderful validation of the strategic thinking, creativity, passion and commitment that went into the work,” said Fayaz Fazal, CEO/Director, American Premium Water. “The awards are a testament to the power of teamwork and the incredible partnership between our teams and our agency partners, Phoenix Ogilvy and Shift Integrated.”

American Premium Water continues to build its brand around quality, innovation and making a positive difference. Through its OrphanCare partnership, the company supports more than 90 orphanages. Over the past decade, the company has donated more than 800,000 liters of clean drinking water to underserved communities. Its sports partnerships have also helped inspire more than 1.6 million individuals to lead healthier and more active lifestyles.

The brand has continued to advance its environmental stewardship and inclusion agenda, including the pioneering launch of a sustainable glass bottle, and initiatives that create greater opportunities for communities.

The four Dragons represent an important milestone in American Premium Water’s journey, providing strong momentum as the brand continues to build on its renewed positioning and ambition for the future.