Stars brightening up Kamala’s scene

Following a noticeable and well-documented drought in celebrities endorsing Joe Biden for a second term, in the early months of 2024, many were suddenly quick to publicly back Kamala Harris as soon as she took the reins.

Sri Lankan artistes, too, have expressed their support of Kamala Harris’ bid for the White House, and these are their views:

When Kamala became Vice President, a shift occurred, where a woman of colour could be recognized for her intelligence and skill at the highest level. Kamala’s kindness and strength has been in evidence throughout her Vice Presidency. She will bring light, empathy, class and quiet strength as America’s next President.

My choice is Kamala. It’s high time the USA has a woman President. Kamala is more genuine than Trump. I feel that she will do justice to all Americans.

Kamala Harris in a very educated, intelligent woman, and the former Attorney General of California. Trump is a businessman who has a very questionable past. Kamala will give Trump a very vigorous fight and the world will be watching in awe and trepidation. However, I guess a lot depends on whether her colour is going to be an impediment and whether America is ready for the first woman President. Yes, she has my endorsement as we need somebody dynamic to take over as the leader of the free world.

I’m certainly not a Trump fan. You know the things that he is doing and the way he talks…people the world over are scared of him. Unfortunately, I’m told that Trump has a huge following in America. Honestly, I don’t know what they see in him! Okay, I better end now as my friends, who generally call me ‘Bumpo’, may refer to me as ‘Trumpo’ after reading my views.

Kamala Harris is the best and I have to congratulate her. After all, she could also be the first Asian to run for Presidency. All blessings to her.

Within an hour of Biden posting his endorsement of Harris, Ariana Grande reshared it on her Instagram Story, and encouraged fans to register to vote by including a link to Headcount’s website.

Barbra Streisand tweeted a fierce defence of the Biden-Harris administration before stating her endorsement of Harris for 2024. “Trump is a pathological liar who lies as easily as he breathes,” she wrote. “Kamala Harris will continue Joe Biden’s work and will be a great President.”

Beyonce subtly endorsed Harris by clearing the use of her song “Freedom” during the politician’s first official visit to her campaign headquarters on July 22, 2024. The superstar was quick to give her approval, giving the green light to use the track for Harris’ campaign. Three days later, the Democratic front-runner used the song in her first campaign video.

Cardi B was for Harris well before Biden even dropped out. In June, she told followers on a livestream, “I feel like it was very selfish of Biden to continue to run for President. They should’ve passed the torch to Kamala,” she added at the time. “This was the perfect moment for her.”

After staunchly standing by Biden up until he announced the end of his candidacy, Carole King was quick to voice support for Harris. “Right person. Right time,” she wrote, sharing a past photo of her posing with the new Democratic front-runner.

“I’m so ready to work to help unite the pro-democracy coalition to reject Trump’s authoritarian, oppressive Project 2025 and elect Kamala Harris as our President,” John Legend wrote in a message shared to Instagram following Biden’s endorsement of his VP. “She’s ready for this fight and I’m excited to help her in any way I can”.

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.