Rotary International President to visit SL on 24 January

Rotary International’s President for 2023 and 2024, Rtn. R. Gordon R. McInally is poised to make a momentous visit to Sri Lanka on 24 January.

The distinguished event will unfold at the Shangri-La Hotel Colombo, creating a significant milestone in the year’s calendar for Rotary District 3220 in Sri Lanka and the Maldives.

The day’s agenda is packed with opportunities for engagement. An intercity meeting in the afternoon will facilitate direct interaction between President McInally and the Rotarians of the District, fostering connections and strengthening ties between Rotary International and the vibrant Sri Lankan and Maldivian Rotary community. The apex of the visit is a Charity Banquet Dinner scheduled to commence at 7 p.m. The evening promises to be a celebration of Rotary’s values and the shared commitment to meaningful service.

There are over 35,000 Rotary clubs in more than 220 countries and geographical areas. Many Rotarians form overseas are confirmed their valuable participation at this event and its significant to Sri Lanka since his visit will promote tourism and more visitors from the Rotary fraternity. Also during his visit, he will launch few community welfare initiatives which will benefit the people of Sri Lanka.

McInally, a respected member of the Rotary Club of South Queensferry, Lothian, Scotland and member since 1984, also has been president and vice president of Rotary International in Great Britain and Ireland. He has also served Rotary International as a director and as a member or chair of several committees. He is currently an adviser to the 2022 Houston Convention Committee and chair of the Operations Review Committee. McInally and his wife, Heather, are Major Donors and Benefactors of The Rotary Foundation. They are also members of the Bequest Society.

McInally’s approach to increasing membership centres on engagement. He advocates for active involvement from Rotary International, regional leaders, and district teams with clubs. “We will grow Rotary both by way of membership and in our ability to provide meaningful service through enhanced engagement,” says McInally, emphasising the pivotal role of membership in the organisation’s vitality. Lauding Rotary’s adaptability during the COVID-19 pandemic, McInally emphasises the importance of merging technological advancements with the best practices of the past. He envisions a future where Rotary continues to grow and increase engagement by fostering a sense of community care and volunteerism.