Nilrandha Fonseka and Ranura Perera crowned National Champions of prestigious AYDA Awards 2023/2024

The AYDA Awards 2023/2024, brought to life by Nippon Paint, witnessed a remarkable showcase of talents nationwide. Nilrandha Fonseka and Ranura Perera emerged as the National Winners for their outstanding design projects, Bhumi and Artisan’s Shack under the categories of Architectural and Interior Design respectively.

The winners captivated judges and audiences alike with their thoughtful approach to design, which seamlessly merged innovation with social consciousness. Their winning submission not only demonstrated creativity but also offered innovative solutions addressing real-life issues. Aligned with the theme – CONVERGE: Championing Purposeful Designs, the National Winners displayed passion in their designs with integrated solutions that are impactful to the society while advancing the field of design.

The AYDA Awards, formerly known as the Asia Young Designer Awards, initiated in 2008 by Nippon Paint, aims to cultivate the next generation of Architectural and Interior Design talents globally.

The exciting journey for Nilrandha Fonseka and Ranura Perera continued at the AYDA Awards international finale in Chennai, India, from 3-5 July.

As the National Winners, they will proudly represent Sri Lanka at the global stage, competing against the other national winners from across the world. The ultimate winners will be awarded the prestigious title of “Designers of the Year” and will have the opportunity to participate in the June 2025 cohort of the Harvard University’s Graduate School of Design’s Design Discovery Program, a three-week fully funded opportunity of up to $ 10,000. The AYDA Awards also honours outstanding achievements in various categories such as the Best Mentor Award, the Nippon Paint Colour Award, the Best Sustainable Design Award, and the Best Design Impact Award.

The AYDA Awards 2023/2024 attracted an impressive array of entries, totalling over 6,000 submissions from top tertiary education institutions globally. This session will feature esteemed judges from reputable architectural and interior design firms.

Nippon Paint Lanka Director/General Manager Nemantha Abeysinghe said: “It has brought us so much joy to see these young designers thrive. It is truly inspiring to witness how all participants produced designs that contributed positively to their community. I am optimistic that our local designers will continue to embrace and contribute towards this transformative direction.”

Reflecting on their journey to the international stage, Nilrandha Fonseka shared, “Participating in the AYDA Awards has been a rewarding and inspirational journey. As a designer, I have a responsibility not just to create art but to use my art as a gateway to think about solving issues pertaining to our built environment, our community and the environment around us and my role is to make the world better place. Nature will always be our problem solver and it’s time we start listening and learning nature more, I applaud Nippon Paint for its ongoing efforts to enable us to think about sustainability through our art, technology and innovation.”

Ranura Perera added, “The AYDA Awards has provided us with the platform to share our skills and inspiration with the world. It has not only honed my skills but also connected me with like-minded individuals who provided me with the guidance and inspiration to push boundaries in design and innovation. We are excited to represent Sri Lanka at the global competition and showcase our vision to the world.”

The AYDA Awards acknowledges the significance of socially conscious design choices, placing emphasis on the societal and environmental consequences of design decisions. With a worldwide footprint extending to over 20 countries and regions, it aims to empower designers to enact change through their designs. The AYDA Awards is dedicated to cultivating creativity and interpersonal skills through its group and one-on-one coaching, mentoring the finalists all the way to the finale. The award is more than just a contest; it’s a cornerstone of Nippon Paint’s corporate social responsibility (CSR) initiative, under the education pillar, where Nippon Paint vows to provide access to education through a collaborative learning platform and art and colour educational programs. Participation is entirely free, ensuring that financial barriers never hinder aspiring designers from realising their full potential and giving back to their communities.

The AYDA Awards, initiated in 2008 by Nippon Paint, has evolved into one of the architecture and interior design industry’s premier awards, receiving over 59,000 entries from 1,200 tertiary education institutions across 20 countries and regions. Concurrently, the event will be held alongside Nippon Paint’s Creative Colour Awards 2023/2024, which serves to recognise the significance of colour in architecture and interior design.