Coca-Cola appoints Kaushali Kusumapala as Country Director for Sri Lanka & Maldives

Coca-Cola has announced Kaushali Kusumapala’s appointment as the new Country Director for Sri Lanka and Maldives, effective from 1st April 2024. Making history as the first Sri Lankan woman in this position, Kaushali succeeds former Country Director, Pankaj Sinha, who assumed the role in 2019. In this position, Kaushali will closely collaborate with bottling teams, customers, partners, consumers and external stakeholders in Sri Lanka and Maldives.

With a career spanning back to 2009, Kaushali has garnered diverse experience having worked with organizations and brands such as Leo Burnett, Fonterra Dairy and Domino’s Pizza. Notably, her journey to leadership includes significant achievements at Hemas International, where she served as Director of Marketing, contributing to market entry strategies, international market development and pioneering marketing initiatives.

Expressing excitement on her appointment, Kaushali stated, “I am thrilled to embark on this journey with Coca-Cola and collaborate with our bottling partners, Coca-Cola Beverages Sri Lanka and Male’ Aerated Water Company, and other stakeholders with the purpose to refresh our consumers. For some years now, Coca-Cola holds a special place for me as a consumer and as a marketeer, and I am deeply committed to steering our loved brands and franchise operations to greater heights.”

Kaushali is a graduate of the University of Melbourne, where she earned her Bachelor of Commerce degree. Her commitment to excellence and continuous learning has been recognized with several prestigious awards, including the Slim Brand Excellence and SLIM Kantar People’s Awards for Local Brand of the Year and CSR Brand of the Year.

Related Topics:Coca-ColaCoca-Cola Country Director for Sri Lanka & MaldivesKaushali Kusumapala

Coca-Cola Beverages Sri Lanka and Uber Eats Sri Lanka launch ‘Ride for Recycling’

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.