Catholic Church highlights missing report on Channel 4 allegations

Archdiocese of Colombo Spokesperson Rev. Father Cyril Gamini Fernando says there is no trace of the report

Emphasises that the report holds critical information about those responsible for orchestrating the attacks

Laments lack of political will to uncover this mastermind behind the bombings, despite evidence being available

Says if this truth is found, most politicians should be in prison and sent home

Archdiocese of Colombo Spokesperson Rev. Father Cyril Gamini Fernando has expressed deep concern over the missing report related to allegations made by British media outlet Channel 4 regarding the 2019 Easter Sunday terrorist attacks. The report, initially handed over to President Ranil Wickremesinghe, has since gone missing, raising questions about accountability and transparency in the investigation, Fernando said.

“We were informed it was handed over to the Attorney General. However we cannot find who it was handed over to and where it is now,” he said.

Fernando made these comments at the launch of the book “Easter Sunday Attacks in Sri Lanka – Shadows of the Deep State and Unanswered Questions” by Sunanda Deshapriya at the Colombo International Book Fair on Tuesday.

Fernando pointed out that despite clear evidence and crucial information contained in the report, it cannot be traced. He also emphasised that the report holds critical information about those responsible for orchestrating the attacks, including suspicions and concerns raised by the Catholic Church with former President Gotabaya Rajapaksa.

He further noted that last year, new information surfaced regarding the involvement of individuals such as Azad Maulana, a former spokesman for the Tamil Makkal Viduthalai Pulikal (TMVP), and the alleged links between Easter Sunday bomber Zahran Hashim and Sri Lankan intelligence officials, as mentioned in the Channel 4 video.

He noted that law enforcement had identified an individual known as Abu Hind, who had maintained constant contact with Zahran Hashim. He said this connection suggests that Abu Hind was likely the mastermind behind the attack and the key handler of Hashim.

Fr. Fernando lamented the lack of political will to uncover this mastermind behind the bombings, despite the evidence being available. “If this truth is found, most politicians should be in prison and sent home,” he remarked, adding that there is no serious effort to bring justice to the victims of the Easter Sunday attacks.

As Sri Lanka heads toward Parliamentary elections, Fr. Fernando urged political parties to clean up their ranks before attempting to clean the country. “This nation must be cleansed, starting with those who lead it,” he said.

President Ranil Wickremesinghe in September 2023 appointed a committee chaired by retired Supreme Court Justice S.I. Imam to investigate the Channel 4 allegations. The committee, which includes retired Air Force Commander A.C.M. Jayalath Weerakkody and Harsha A.J. Soza PC, was tasked with probing claims that some Sri Lankan Government officials were complicit in the 2019 bombings.

Channel 4’s video contained explosive allegations from whistleblowers, including Maulana, who claimed a meeting took place between Zahran Hashim and the Head of the State Intelligence Service. These revelations have led to widespread calls, including from His Eminence Malcolm Cardinal Ranjith, for an independent international investigation into the bombings.