UN Global Compact Network Sri Lanka’s strategic approach catalyses Sustainable Business Solutions

UN Global Compact Network Sri Lanka drives the mission of promoting sustainable and responsible business practices through impactful events and programmes. These initiatives demonstrate its resounding commitment to business innovation and sustainability, aligning with the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs).

Network Sri Lanka facilitated corporate speakers and sessions at the regional flagship event ‘Forward Faster Now | Asia & Oceania’ on 05-06 August 2024 in Kuala Lumpur.

Organized by the United Nations Global Compact in collaboration with 15 Global Compact Country Networks and country offices in the Asia & Oceania region, ‘Forward Faster Now | Asia & Oceania’ as a UN Global Compact regional flagship event took place in Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia, and hosted by the UN Global Compact Network Malaysia & Brunei.

The event gathered high-level executives, Government officials, corporate sustainability experts, and practitioners from the Asia & Oceania region. It aimed to drive business ambition on the SDGs, assess regional progress, identify gaps, and highlight scalable solutions tailored to the region’s unique context.

Network Sri Lanka made a significant contribution by facilitating a crucial session titled ‘Food Systems Sustainability: Business Strategies to Future-Proof Food Security.’ The panel discussion explored the complexities of regional food systems and the private sector’s role in addressing these challenges. Distinguished panellists included Sheamalee Wickramasingha, Group Managing Director, CBL Group; James Leyson, Director of Global Impact and Operations, Scholars of Sustenance Foundation; Dr. Jörn Schmidt, Director of Sustainable Aquatic Food Systems, WorldFish; moderated by Olivier Tichit, Director of Sustainability, Musim Mas Group with closing remarks by Ratnesh Jha, Executive Director, UN Global Compact Network India. The Panellists and speakers from Sri Lanka, Thailand, Malaysia, Indonesia and India delivered diverse expert insights from the region.

By facilitating the panel discussion, Network Sri Lanka encouraged sustainable food practices, foster industry collaboration, enhance regional food security, amplify sustainable development impact across Asia and Oceania, and highlight the private sector’s role in sustainable food systems.

Bangladesh-SL FTA could help boost bilateral trade though uncertainties remain – Economist

Union Assurance celebrates brilliance at Partnership Distribution Annual Awards 2023

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.