Swadeshi Khomba Baby Soap receives SLS certification

Swadeshi Chief Executive Officer Amila Udawatte receives SLS certification from Sri Lanka Standards Institution Director General and Chief Executive Officer Dr. Siddhika G. Senaratne in the presence of The Swadeshi Industrial Works PLC and Sri Lanka Standards Institution officials at the presentation ceremony

SLS certification is important because it assures mothers that Khomba Baby Soap has been certified as safe and gentle on a baby’s skin.

Natural, mild protection and herbal trust have been the hallmarks of Khomba Baby care range, helping establish it as one of the most trusted and loved herbal baby care brands in Sri Lanka.

By incorporating high-quality standards and processes, firmly certified under SLS, new parents can rest assured that their baby is in the safest natural nurturing care of Khomba Baby, as explained by Swadeshi Deputy Chairperson and Managing Director Chulodhara Samarasinghe.

SLS 547 is the Sri Lanka Standard Specification for Baby Soap, which sets mandatory quality, safety and performance requirements for soaps intended for infants. The SLS 547 standard includes requirements for ensuring baby soaps are safe, non-irritating, high quality mild and suitable for infant skin. The standard is mandatory for both importation and local manufacturing, verified under the SLSI import inspection scheme.

This SLS certification is critical in giving consumers confidence in a product’s consistent quality as the SLS institution maintains stringent standards and ongoing checks of certified products in the market.

In addition to the SLS 547 certification, Khomba Baby soap products have been internationally dermatologically tested and certified as safe for babies’ skin. As a brand, Khomba Baby ensures compliance with the ISO 9001:2015 standard, thereby providing the best and safest quality herbal products in the country.

Swadeshi has been making gentle herbal soaps since 1941 and has followed high-quality standards and has now introduced the Khomba Baby brand with nature’s best herbal ingredients such as coconut milk, rathmal, venivel and avocado to add value to its consumers.

According to SLSI and NMRA, the evaluation panel ensures that the certificate is valid.