Dialog Axiata renews pledge to GSMA’s Connected Women Commitment Initiative

Reaffirming its dedication to gender equality and digital empowerment, Dialog Axiata PLC, Sri Lanka’s #1 connectivity provider, renewed its pledge to the GSMA’s Connected Women  Commitment Initiative. This commitment underscores Dialog’s dedication to eradicating digital divides and empowering Sri Lankan women through enhanced access to mobile internet and mobile money services.

The initiative is a response to the alarming gender gap in mobile phone ownership and usage in low- and middle-income households, which hinders women’s participation in the digital world. Dialog joined forces with the GSMA’s Connected Women Programme in 2018 with an aim to address these barriers, recognizing that empowering women with digital tools not only promotes gender equality but also opens up significant growth avenues for industries.

“Dialog Axiata is committed to fostering inclusivity and sustainability in Sri Lanka’s digital landscape,” stated Supun Weerasinghe, Group Chief Executive of Dialog Axiata PLC. “Our renewed commitment to the GSMA Connected Women Programme is a testament to our belief in the transformative power of connectivity. By empowering women, we not only advance their digital and financial inclusion but also catalyse broader socio-economic benefits, driving progress towards a more equitable society.”

Commenting, Claire Sibthorpe, Head of Digital Inclusion at GSMA said, “Through the signing of the GSMAConnected Women Commitment, Dialog Axiata is demonstrating their dedication towards building a more inclusive society. Connecting women not only empowers them but also enriches communities, drives economic growth, and paves the way for a more equitable future. We applaud Dialog Axiata for their leadership and commitment to narrowing the gender gap in Sri Lanka.”

President’s comments bring bourse back to life following dismal start

Dialog, Axiata Group and Bharti Airtel sign Definitive Agreement to merge operations in Sri Lanka

Dialog partners SLIM to launch ‘SLIM Dialog Brand Week 2024’ for second consecutive year

Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment Name *

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.