Sri Lanka and Iran discuss bilateral cooperation, violence in Gaza

ECONOMYNEXT – Sri Lanka’s President Ranil Wickremesinghe and Iran’s Minister of Foreign Affairs Hossein Amir-Abdollahian have discussed the Persian Gulf’s crucial role in broader Indian Ocean security, the ongoing violence in Gaza and opportunities for enhancing bilateral cooperation.

Amir-Abdollahian, who is an official visit, met Wickremesinghe at the Presidential Secretariat on Tuesday evening.

“President Wickremesinghe reiterated the Sri Lankan government’s firm stance on the Gaza conflict, emphasizing the immediate necessity for violence cessation and the urgent need for a peace settlement,” a statement by the president’s media division said.

“He underscored the principle that any peace agreement must be inclusive and not based solely on the demands of either side. Additionally, the President proposed the establishment of a Palestinian State within a timeframe of five years, ensuring the security of both Palestine and Israel.”

Highlighting Sri Lanka’s strategic position in the Indian Ocean, President Wickremesinghe emphasized the nation’s commitment to ensuring Freedom of Navigation, particularly in the Persian Gulf. He stressed the vital role of the Persian Gulf in the broader context of Indian Ocean security, according to the statement.

Minister Amir-Abdollahian expressed Iran’s dedication to fostering tourism to Sri Lanka and strengthening cultural ties between the two nations. He “conveyed Iran’s eagerness to explore avenues for expanded economic cooperation with Sri Lanka.”

Last week, Wickremesinghe told Israel’s Minister of Transport and Road Safety, Brig Gen Miri Regev that Sri Lanka was committed to a two-State solution. “Highlighting Sri Lanka’s stance on the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, President Wickremesinghe reiterated the nation’s support for the establishment of a Palestinian State.”

Regev, a former Israeli Defense Force spokesman, was in the island to sign a direct air service agreement between Israel and Sri Lanka to facilitate labour migration, Ports, Shipping, and Aviation Minister Nimal Siripala de Silva said in Parliament today. “They are paying salaries of 8-10 lakhs, and are willing to take up to 20,000 Sri Lankan workers.” (Colombo/Feb21/2024)