Iraq encourages re-establishment of Lankan embassy to boost diplomatic and economic ties

Chargé d’Affairs of Embassy Mohammed Obaid Jabur Zahir Al-Masoudi says reopening embassy helps to address visa issues, improve trade relations

Encourages Sri Lankan investors to explore business opportunities in Baghdad and Kurdistan

Praises Sri Lanka’s progress towards economic stability, reaffirms Iraq’s commitment to supporting economic development

Trade Minister Nalin Fernando outlines economic situation, stresses need for international support across various sectors

Highlights importance of international partnerships in fostering economic recovery and growth

Chargé d’Affairs of the Embassy of the Republic of Iraq in Sri Lanka Mohammed Obaid Jabur Zahir Al-Masoudi encouraged the re-establishment of a Sri Lankan embassy in Iraq, to strengthen diplomatic and economic engagement between the two countries.

He said the move is seen as a crucial step in addressing visa issues and smoother trade relations.

Al-Masoudi made these remarks during a meeting with Trade Minister Nalin Fernando on Wednesday to discuss conducting the 9th session of Iraq-Sri Lanka for Economic and Technical Cooperation in Sri Lanka scheduled to be held in November. The forum offers a platform to strengthen bilateral relations between both countries.

Reiterating the importance of strengthening economic ties, the Head of the Embassy encouraged Sri Lankan investors to explore business opportunities in Baghdad and Kurdistan.

Iraq remains a major buyer of Ceylon Tea and around 150,000 Sri Lankan labourers work in Iraq. The meeting also addressed tax issues on goods traded between the two countries and explored ways to enhance trade efficiency.

He praised Sri Lanka’s rapid progress toward economic stability and reaffirmed Iraq’s commitment to supporting the country’s economic development, the Trade Ministry said in a statement.

The Chargé d’Affairs outlined the advantages of direct shipping facilities, which could offer Sri Lanka faster and more convenient access to European and Middle Eastern markets, further boosting trade opportunities. Minister Fernando provided an overview of Sri Lanka’s current economic situation and underscored the need for international support not only in the monetary sector but across various other sectors.

He highlighted the vital role of international partnerships in fostering economic recovery and growth.